INTRODUCTIONThis book was put together due to popular demand by a bunch of pirates, with a lot of help from the Freethe Airwaves campaign and the D.R. Communications technical group in Bristol. Its been a long time comingbut well worth waiting for. This is the First Edition, January 1987, its still a bit rough but we hope to update itregularily.Its intended as a 'Do-It -Yourself' Pirate's Handbook, aimed at promoting neighbourhood, political and openaccessradio pirates ... But obviously you can use it as you wish ... You can build the transmitters and use them tojam out Aunty Beeb, you can play your favourite music, or you can set up local open-access stations as wesuggest...Or you can set up a fascist station and we'll come and kick your heads in!This is an action propaganda book. We're not trying to 'cover the subject' or write an 'objective history'. Wedo include a brief section on recent political pirates in Britain, and another on radio pirate s around the world.But the only purpose of this is to illustrate hard learned lessons and brilliant ideas to help and inspire the 'would be'pirate of tomorrow.The practical 'How To Be A Radio Pirate' section is a much longer and more detailed version of the pamphletby Our Radio (the open-access pirate,1981-1983) which has been long out of print . This shou ld kill offfinally any 'technical mystery' on the subject which might be holding you back. It practically tells you how todo up your shoelaces before venturing forth to put your message on the airwaves. Its mainly about FM piracy,though we include a shorter section and a transmitter design for the less popular Medium Wave.The aim of the large technical section is to spread the art of transmitter building from the few semi-professionaltechnicians to the l000's of eager electronics enthusiasts all over the world. Its just about possible for thecomplete beginner to build a transmitter from this book. And you can write to Free The Airwaves and D.R.Communications , who are more than happy to give you help and advice with problems as you go along. We alsoinclude projects for the more advanced, and contacts for obtaining still more advanced designs.We also include a section on the legal situation in Britain, and a good range of contacts for current radiopirates and technical info sources. And 40 Elizabethan sonnets to round it all off.Its quite logical really that this handbook was finally produced and printed by anarchists. No one else(least of all political parties) looks forward with glee to the undermining of the Institutions of The State, orto setting the radio media free for you and me and Joanna Soap to use as we wish!Forward: LET 1000 AERIALSRADIATE Welcome to 'Radio is my Bomb' . This ls it, at lastthe manual of the guerrilla pirate, as complete aswe can make it. Of course there have been radio piratessince rad io was discovered, Marconi himself becamethe 1st pi rat e , when the authorities preventedhim fully using h i s own discovery. But in the last10 years, with the pop ulari t y of FM radio, becominga pirate has bec ome ever cheaper and more simple.You can't go out and buy a tr ansm itt er at the cornershop, but you can buy a ll the components . Now at lastusing the information in this book, and for the priceof a couple of dole cheques , you and your friendscan comeon air on the half empty FM band as a localstation.In other countries, (Prance, Belgium,Italy,Hollandand now Spain), the State has tried to control andown the radio waves, and simply been flooded by anuncontrollable mob of largely commercial local PMpirates.We want that to happen here too . Thats why we madeth i s book. But we' re not too keen on the commercialpirates, who spend their time trying to hog the tech nologyimitate the commercial trash stat i ons, an deven sabotage the competition, and all to make quickcash for the businessmen who run them. The 'Pree Market'is only fr ee for the rich and powerful. Repeating tracks and ads at - intervals designed by computerto entrap the non · existant average MAN into buyingtheir crap, till every stat i on sounds exactlythe same.Nor are we turned on anymore by the trad 1 t i ona 1pirate DJ's, who tend to be all the same white sexi stmacho morons, preening their egos and spewing forthinane chatter i n the hope of getting a fa t careerin the legal med ia.We'd like instead to put everyone on air! To rec laimthe airwaves from t he parasites who infest it .1.We'd like to see ethnic radio, womens radio, tenants,un ions, anarchists, community groups, old people,prisoners, pacifists, urban gorillas, localinfo, gays, straights and of course every possible·· variety of musical entertainment.A few people have tried to start these kinds ofpirate stations in the recent past but have been stampedon by the State (by both Tory and Labour Governments).we can learn quite a lot from their experience,which we go into in following chapters. Onething thats clear is the value of numbers, simplythat they can't stamp on everyone.Another lesson is the value of be i ng local, firstof all because its much more di f ficult for the nastiesto track and catch you, and less rewarding whenthey do, and second! y because there's a 'commercialgap', people can't make much money out of local stations, while anti-commercial pirates could surviveand thrive. There is anot her reason why we're pushingfor a new wave of local pirates , because we thinkrad i o should be a two way thing, with as much feedbackas possible and lots of groups taking part andmaking their own shows. To hell with BroadcastingAuthorities, Peers. Lords, Judges, MIS moles and pontificatingmiddle class professionals!You may now be thin king this is an anarchist booktrying to create chaos just to get back at Big Brother. Think what you lik e. We'd prefer radio chaosto the 'aural diahorrea' we have r i ght now! But infact chaos has nothing to do with it. For a startthere's plenty of r oom, ' Free The Airwaves' have calculatedthere's room for 471 one mile FM pirates inLondon alone without interfering with anyone (thenof course there's the space the police have 'p i rated'and will eventually have to move off). We're talkingabo ut cooperation, not chaos and competition. Aboutopen access radio, where all kinds of people can sharefacilit i es and put out occasional shows or infoas they wi sh. We're talking about frequency shar ing,about community defence , about each ethn i c group havingprogrammes in their own language, etc. And whensuch a wave of local pirates begins we'll be talkingaboutnetworks, or a 111ovement, or a federation, orwhatever we wi sh to call it. Like for instance thefederations of the anti-commercial p ir ates in Franceor Spain ( see International Section). So thatproblems and overlaps can be amicably sorted outand repression can be fought togetner. And we saynow that any future Federation should be anti-commercial,and ban racists, fascists, sexists and all politicalparties from our ranks!This may all seem a bit idealistic, and what iswrong with that! Any new · wave of pirates will comefrom people and popular culture. It will certainlyNOT come from the 'broad left', divided as they arein 100 fragments competing for power, melllbers andsoft jobs i n a Labour Party regime. Nor wi ll thenew pirates come from the ''Community Rad i o'' (CR)movement, called i nto being by nazi Norman h i mse lf ,and when denied licences have proved incapable ofputting a single pirate on air, for fear of breakingthe law. Now the CR activists are waiting for grantsand token controlled licenses under Labour. TheseSLUMPies (Socialist Leaning Upwardly Mobile Persons )should beware, socialists love state control evenmore than Tories. Consider the Eastern Block withtotally controlled media and pirates hunted down bypolice and army. The Labour Party has been the biggestpirate-buster of all (as well as bringing in NukePower, the Bomb, Internment etc) and even t ried tojam Radio North Sea off the air (in 1970).We are optimistic nevertheless . in fact we're quitesure the FM band will f i ll up with pirates again,simply because the technology is becoming so cheapand simple. The· State knows this quite well, andseeks to postpone it with the carrot of controlled' 'Community' ' Radio and the big stick of the latestanti-pirate laws. This is where the real battle lies,and why we devote so much of this book to 'How toget away with it' . In fact its a complete myth that'political' pirates g:e.t busted more often than othersand even a half dozen 'open access ' stations couldflout the present laws, with a little organisat i onand i magination. But the State has more strings toits bow than brute force, as the history of piratesin other countries shows. If they can't bust us offthe air, for whatever reason, they may try to buyus off - legalise a few under their control, infiltratethem with mi ddle class professionals who willspout their ideology (they don't have to arrange this, these people will descend like locusts), and crackdown harder on the rest . If this tactic failed towork , for whatever reason,'At:ruALLW'/ E:. D.X'sARE. vay 5HY Mir>VUL.NUA6LE..MfNbackon the. 'Italian' solution. What happened therewas there were suddenly so many pirates t hat the Statejust declared a free for al l, in the knowledgethat the big commercial, party and re li gious stationsthus created would eventua l y swamp the autonomouspirates off t he air!Some people still naively think that radio is somehowunbiased .. Think again!. Apart from the author it arianBBC and IBA control by rich peop le with upperclass views, the kind of people employed can be r elied on to spout t he pre judi ces and preconceptionsof their class (and this before thinking of the nowproven infiltration by MIS state agents!). Of cours eif you 're a nationalist, sex i st, fascistic littleSUN lover you may notice nothing amiss. Its i nterestingthe way we' re Condit i oned and control le d by themedi a , you can look at it by listing the people, sub jects,v i ews , mus ic , languages etc left out or barelyrepresented. Or consider where the news on radioactually comes fro m and why its c hosen as important.When you say 'Fr ee The Airwaves' you need to workout what you mean by Freedom. We know what WE want,and its a lot more than a 2 mi nute phone-in slot cagedin the 'media zoo ' . This book is for people willingto think, who know quite well what they want,and are prepared to take simple practical steps towardsmaking a new real ity from their own dreams, andeven to have some fun in the process. The empty dia lis tuned over to you!If you have any more, or betterc/o BM Hurricane, London WC1N3XX.information please send it in to us for the ne)'t edition to : RATS,1OURRADIO9oufofOf caspt refer.OUR R'BDIO! .'This is OUR RADIO, London 's on y open aco1M1unity pirate, coming to you on 103.8 FM'. ., 1/ ./4Gaywaves~ ~"Then there was GAYWAVES , the first programme iOur Radio was the most successful open access pir- th i s country made ~t and for homosexuals. Most critate so far, and what happened to it gives us some icisms of Gaywaves have been based on prejudice, 1useful lessons for setting up non commercial, polit- did sufter at first by being made mainly by just oniical, or community based pirates in the future. So man, but others qu i ckly joined in and it became h i ·we go into its interesting history here i n some det - ghly informative and entertaining, very soon it hacail. , . T·-·· E L:-EP~H!·,· No~ ~~ gtora mbmee , extewnidthe d mutsoi c, two nehwosu, rs. humIto urw, as jian glmesa gazineet c. proItwasalso an open access programme for gay people,gay men as it turned out, though a lesbian show wasplanned ... 'We wanted to involve other people to gath-Our Radio grew out of a campaign for open access er news and info, which would then go into the show .radio called Com Com, in the late 70 ' s. This cainpaign This was known as the Gaywaves Network and we gotgot nowhere, and in 1980 some disillus i oned members a few things through that. We had an arts sectionformed London Open Radio (LOR), a l obby group fo r with poetry, stories and reviews of non commercia lalternat i ve radio. LOR also got mowhere, but it was p l aces. - .What we really wanted was a 6 hour showgiven some cash, and decided to go pirate instead. -,,,,. wi th 2 hours of us, two of Lesbian pr ogramm i ng andThus Our Radio was born, two of the real, unnamed, flll' 2 of mi xed humour, with a lot of camp fun and musicheroes were a couple of blokes who set about building flll' to balance it all out'.tr a nsm i tters (TX's). At that t i me TX designs were ~ Gaywaves was attacked from all s id es, not onl yeven more a guarded secret of commerc i al pirate eng- ~ by the press and the Po li ce, but by the strai ght gayi neers . The a im was to libe r ate such deg i gns , copy ":., media (papers) thems0lves, who were jea l ous and hatedthem, and develop a vers i on which was easy to mass ":., its left wing slant .produce by non experts . They failed in th i s last , .· h h -~ Of c our se Gaywave s . wasn' t restricted so l e ly toa1m ( t ey were also appy to train anyone interest e d)~ . gay i ssues. For examp l e t he f irst time our Radio lostbut left beh i nd a lot of i nfo which prov i des the gr- ',Joundwork for much of the Technical sect i on of this ~ a tr a nsmitter we were play i ng a Gaywaves t ape of Artbook.In the long run our Radio was defeated on all hur Sca r g ill speaking at a CND rally, ha r dly a gayfronts, after the last bust we had no TX's left (ex c- ( issue but an important one all the same . To this dayept a MW rig which turned out to be a dud) and no Gaywaves rema i ns a uniqu e a nd brilliant e xamp l e.money, resources or ene r gy to make For Our Rad i o as a whole Ga ywaves was a big p lu s , 6 just th e k i nd of thing we wer e advocating . Ph il Cox~ the presenter has since compl ai ne d bitterly in pr i ntt hat we were slack, unreliabl e , unprofessional, no t1' ~ ' ...... _,JRegular Our Rad i o broadcasts began in Feb 82 . Itwas anno unc ed as an open access station, and peo plewere invited to make programmes. But the respon s ewas very slow . \.le had chosen 103.8, a t t he top endof he waveband beyond the police, as our f r eque nc yas it was officially declared an unused channe l (l atera whole range of pirates fo ll owed us) but we hadno ready made aud i ence l ike the mus i c p ir ates . Wehad to f i ght f or our audience by putting out regular •programmes. A big problem was that there was no supportnetwork, and no income but wha t we put in oursel ves (but we were most l y on the dole) or ra is edfrom a few bene fi t gigs. We knew that at a certainpoint we'd ga i n publicity and a mass following, andso get the people and cash to expand and make us veryhard to stop . We chose Wednesday nights, with theide a of gett i ng quietly establ i shed, at that timeraids were no r mally made at the weekends. For a longtime this tactic worked, but listener supp o rt sti 11didn't materialise. It seemed that passive consump tionof the media was as i ngrained in our audienceas any other . Nor could we go live, or do phone-ins,for one thing we didn't have a 'link' TX (though wewere close to this when the final busts began). ,~, ._. . One programme to join early and stay with us wasUTAPIA, an independent cassette programme, producedmainly by one bloke with amazing energy and extens-5. ive contacts. It included poetry and plays as wellas music which featured the Murphy .:Institute, Dannyand the Dressmakers, ·Ch-arle-s -Ba-kow·sk~i, etc . ~ ..\., i n stereo, and got up at 8. 30 i n the e v e n i ng e t c .. '\ Thi s i s pretty unfa i r, in fact a few people were wo'\rking r ound the clock to keep all the gear go i ng with'no money or r esources . For us the only pr ob l em with, Gay - waves was that they rema i ned consumers .. ie the ywouldn' t help with the broadcasting s i de o f i t at:::: a l l. So they hadn't much idea what was involved. Fore xamp l e , after a hard day of pr ob l ems li ke loc a t i ng' and checking a new s it e , borrowing leads , repair i ng..,_ gear , coll e ct i ng tapes, wait i ng f or buses , mi ssing""" r endezvous, s e tt i ng up the a eri a l, hiding from nei3.ghbours , doubling back because o f suspicious bods,rain,ri)il, wi nd and snow, we ' re finally re ady to comeon ail and cover most of the London a rea, five minu t esear l y ! ... Then a l ookout reports a po l ice car parkedby the next block . . could be a bus t . . we startto dismantle everything but he soon drives off. \.leswitch on at last , only 20 mi nutes late. A Vi ctory !Then we get complaints a bout always being la te, gettingup at 8.30pm and not be i ng i n ste r eo ! So it goes.I n all we broadcast abou t 40 Gaywaves progr ammes ,a lot of them 2 hour shows , and a lot of them undersevere pressure. I n fact when the police broke downthe door at 9 . 30pm on 23 r d March 83 , in the bust thatf i nally finished Our Rad i o , i t was Gaywaves that th e yinterrupted . The next programme would have been Womenon the Waves . ~~ellon The w;,;yWOMEN ON THE WAVES was a later addition to OurRadio. It began wi th a coup l e of women play i ng theirfavourite music, a ll by and for women, and quicklydeveloped f r om t he r e, wit h t he \./omen i n th e Ci ty feministgroup fr om Islingt on j o ining in , as wel l asanarcha- f emi n i s t s f r om Br i xton. Women On The \.laveswas a new and vitally necessary form of programme,a tiny womehs space on t he a i rwaves. i n oppositionto all the oth e r medi a whi ch more or l ess openly promotessexism, exploitation,attacks on women and the ...... Party member! Heres a short list of some of the f avoerosionof womens ·rights' . Women on the Waves began . -, uri te items and topics I remember : . . . Mock streetdoing news, i nformation and interviews of things like -...,;: interviews on the Nuclear Hol ocaust, Drug tak i ng i nGreenham Womens Peace Camps, Womens Aid, prisoners, . , the Falklands, Police Monitoring News, Greenham demo ·demos, music, womens music events etc. Unfortunately ~ tapes, The Pope on Abortion, police death squads in .our Radio was closed down before Women On The Waves ., Irel.and, the Fallout Marching Band, the Peop l e of 'could deve l op much further. There wasn' ~ any division "-= No Property, Shit of The Week Competitions, Rastabetween Women On The Waves and the st a tion as a whole~ , raps , Coli n Roach demo tapes, The fake Queens Xmas. ~ Speech , Hi p Hop News. 'Mill i ons of Dead Cops' interv~.,iews . Comiso Campaign, Community Po l i c i ng by Morons,~ Crowbar news. Christy Moore. Free The Airwaves andCambridge Communi ty Rad i o News, Ant i Fascist Songs,~ Angry Brigade Communique .. 'Look over your shoulder,Pig .. . ', Shoplifting Ad and Rob i n Hood rap, Pr i sonersNews, Hippy take offs .. 'I feel like a used roach i nthe cosmic total i ty, man' .. , Poison Gi r l s, WindscaleExpose, ALF Interviews, Drug Prices on The Block Exechange(joke), Crass, Vandal of The Month Awards,Billy Connolly, Macho morons sketch, CND slag off,Medical Experiments. Falklands: Remember the Dismembered,Pirate Listings , Soul music, Chile and El Salv adorinterviews, ... etc'I think i tend to remember the outrageous stuff.we actually produced some serious researched mater -, , /IJl1efreesp~<:z~~ , \'This is THE FREESPACE, Anti Capital Rad i o on103.8 FM' .. After a while The Message was gett i ng~ so full that mus i c and interviews were being crowdedout. The Freespace was p l anned as a pure anarchistshow, against all authority, but we only began making~ it at the end when the crackdown had already begun,and it was on ly broadcast once. Its hard to say howthe programme would have developed. The first tapes'j were f u ll of take offs, impressions, satire. attacks~ .on the police and punk and reggae music.',J 'Here come BPAC on 103' ... but they never did. BPAC~ was the Black Peoples Action Centre, a b i g youth sq .~uat and poli~e monitoring group in Croydon , who had"- begun preparing tapes for Our Radio through anarchi.~ st contacts just before the final bust. The BPACwhich wa s a good th i ng some of the same women worked ~ was b~nt down by local fasciS t s, with blatant police• . _.. collusion.on The Message and other programmes, and were invo l v -., i r ed in organising, fund raising,controlled the cash(what there was), pub l ic i ty and were becoming involv - ,Illed in the broadcasting. Not that Our Radio was free ,of sexism, but it was be i ng confronted on a da il y ~basis. r .\.', '-"'11te-.:Me~ag//eiY I 'If the time i s 9 o clock . then t h i s is THE MESS- ~AGE on Our Radio , 103. 8 FM' . The Message magazi ne r.programme was radical rad i o at its best, and really ~the heart and platform of Our Radio. Usually fantast- , .ic . occasionally diabolical. it was put together by ~four to ten people, who all brought material,preparedtapes and reco r ds to the Our Radio studio and craftedthe whole lot together onto a one hour tape . ~Most other pirates hated us for being 'political' andfor disproving the pirate myth that one word out of THE BAG, Our Radio ' s latenight show, was a pro-1 ine will get you busted immediately. In fact Our gramme of music and cut -ups without any nagging DJRadio was only successfully busted twice in over a to bother you. It was beautifully and skilfully madeyear (compare this to London Gr eek radio's recent stuff, each programme had a theme eg. Religion, Monrecordof 3 busts in one week!) . ey Society , etc and a title eg . The Undercover BAGOne original purpose of The Message was to lobby Operation, The Good The BAG and the Ugly , The Fivefor Community Radio licences, on the lines of Aust r a- Pound BAG, etc . Lots of clever dubbing and playingl i a or Canada. Another was simp l y to entertain, with l round with film and TV theme tunes. Sometimes if thimusic,mock advertising, outrageous spoofs and wi l d ngs were go i ng well the Bag could stretch on for twohumour. A th i rd purpose was to air the v i ews and news or even three hours, since it was the l ast show ofthat you never hear on the highly restr i cted, class the n i ght. The person beh i nd the Bag was one of thebased and self censoring British media. One advantage best and anonymous organisers of Our Radio. and wasof The Message was that people with no experience largely responsible for the open studio, music andcould eas il y j oin in and quickly learn the basics ~ sow_id resources, as we_ll as wor ki n_g with the broadcofsound reco r ding. For instance in Sept. 82 people asting crew and promotion to the bitter end.~~---..~ ~~ 2a~?. .~ !d~~~2:. .d . ~ ~, !~:s h~~~grf:':~~1f~i ~~~a1~~/et;t ;~\\strs:Oda\;a0~from Brixton Squatte r s Aid heard the open access inv - good audience among London's Pol· h · ·i tat i on and came a l ong to do a spot. At that time t~e- produced by one small group out is of m~~;rf;~ · e1;r;asre were only two such local groups among Londons ""-·of po li tical Polish exiles i ts g ay30,~00 squatters and BSA were promoting ( and s~ill ~ rt the e mbattled Solid arn~sc F:e~P~:=d~a~n~~nsup~dare.) such se l f organisation and res i stance to evict- ' also provide con t act new d · f 1 'i ith th i h t •er b , B • • s an in o . ts worth notonsw e r news s ee ~ . ow ar . ut BSA is ing that Radio So li darnosc (London), with our radiobas~d at _121@ Centre, and within weeks half ~he ana - ..._ was closed by state repression well before Rad i o Sol rchistsin South Londo~ were reading out items on ~ idarnosc (Poland ) was finally crushed by General JarTheMessage , and bringing some welcome new energy ""- uzelsk i and the KGB. The mai n producer of Radio Soli -into Our Rad i o. Al most everybody i nvolved in Our Rad- """' da r nosc was a rather volatil h t h .io had something on the sho w, including one Labour 4 tle sympathy with our 1. ncr eaes cin agr acp ro ebrl,e mws Oo fh adp rio~r 1- t -ities, resources and repression. After we had failed studios'. Next thing the GLC started doing press contobroadcast his tape a couple of times Radio Solid- :"'. ferences and publicity in support of us. Since thearnosc gave up and left Our ~dio some weeks before '-- · Tories were at the t i me tryin g to stifle and abolishthe final bust . ...... .---'!~""::=-'-::1"1_...._ ~ the GLC ,omp letely, such publicity was like signing 02 ~ """'- ~~ ·our own 'bust warrant'! Barbrook's own aim, as he DB lllr,~., ~ admitted in the book 'Rebel Radio' was to hustle him -~------~ '-.' self a career as a Labour Pa rty spokesman on communi-'-.~ ty radio. To him Our Rad io was 'just agitprop' toDREAD BROADCASTING CORPORATION (DBC) started off ~ establish his credentials and get a fat grant (hewith the help of Our Rad io , in fact for their fir st got up to £200,000 off them and Camden after we were6 month s or so they were borrowing our tr~nsmitter. ~ closed down ) for his nex t projects. (In fact Barbr-DBC was a unique and exciting first radica l blac,k ook abandoned Our Radio after the March 83 bust, refreggaestation and gained insta n t popula r ity. Its used to be a wi tness at the tr ial or help with t hebeen s~id . in print that. DBC le:t C?ur ~adlo beca use , bust fund for the squa tter who got nicked, thought hey d i sliked our politics . Thi s l;> Iles. We were) he himself owned an apartment i n Hampstead, and lat erhappy to help DBC start up by lending our TX, th at wrote a load of lies (in Rebe l Radio ) attac .king thewas the arra ng eme~t, and t~ey broadcast as a sepera- feminists an d anarchists in our Radio, presumablyte station on their own night, never decla,r i ng th em- to d ist ance himself from us). The lesson from Ourselves part of Our Radio, much as we would have liked . ,Radio's flirtat ion with the GLC must surely be ' Nevit,it wasn't the ir a im to be part of an open access~e r trust a politic ia n!• .station. The "'. ha;-1e their own unforgettab le Place · In fact there weren't many open political con fr -in p irate radio history . ontations i n Our Radio, though there could have been;~~~~ :%%~~ g o~:ra;::stittuati:~ke;: 1~~t;~~nsm::sb~sr'sh~~sh~;n~n~~~=, :--,. _____ ..,. in g like that. The consensus was 'nothing racist,sex-\.. "Ill '~ ist or f a sc is t', but unfortunate ly didn't exclude..,. _ ~ ~ ~ pol1tical party members (since Our Radio had evolv-~ IS. takes .;and-Failures ,. ~ ed from LOR w_hich had . Labour party sympath~es) _ We,. were a l so anti commercials, though we wer en t aboutWhat went wrong wi th Our Radio, and what l essons ,~ to i .mpose this preference on anyone e l se. In factare to be le arnt. we wer e closed down by th e State -.,,,i nothing was ever censored on Our Radio , though itthrough the DTI and' poli c e, but they cou l d only do ½1/J½~ ~~~~this beacause we were already weak. By the start of ~ ~-------...._ """'11111111983 the team of people around Our Radio were coming , • ~ ~ ~under heavy pressure. The main problem was lack of ~ could have been. For instance if Richard Barbrooksupport, reflecting the wi der d i visions among the ~ had succeeded in getting any Labour Party groups to'left' in London , the lack of any peop le's moveme n t, ~ make tapes, we 'd probably have refused to broadcastjust single is sue campaigns, crea t ed, exp l oited and .. ~ or 'lost' the tape (a bad solution) or called a genefina ll Y killed off by parasitical Trotskyist and Sta - ~ ral meet i ng and had a sp li t. Open access can onlylinist midd l e class i ntell ect uals, for the sole purp- ,~ go so far. In th is instance we'd be daft, even ifose of incre as ing the ir own membership,p r ofit and r~ we ag1:eed with Part i es, to support one whic~ has bE:enprestige. (phew.typist) i the biggest p ir ate buster of all, even trying to JamWe dec i ded to seek .public it y, the alternative and Radio North sea off the air (back in 1970) in tru emus i c press weren 't too interested so we t rie d to ~ Kremlin style, not to mention other indiscret i onsget on TV, and did a good interview with Thames , but (l ike the Bomb, Internme nt ,Nuc lear Power,etc etc) .t he only par t they screened was the shot of one of ' So the reasons fo r the end of Our Radio weren'tus putting up an aer ial, the only bit we were worri- j as simple as they first appear. The main reason musted about. have been that they disliked our politics , but iton the techn i ca l front we were building ou r own ~ was also par tl y just cos ' our turn came up'. Whendigital frequency counter, and also a 'link' TX and th ey finally decided to get us we played ' cat andreceiver so that we cou l d go l iv e. Bu t we still didn' mouse' wit h them for about six weeks, s i nce we cou ldt have a reliable repeatab l e TX design. After the \.°' not afford to l ose our last TX and gear. This enragedbust of Dec 15th 82 we scrapp ed t he 'link' and put ~ them and they turned all their resources against us.the bits into a new TX. We h a d no money fo r parts, ..°. ' For the broadcasting team it all go t quite exc iti ng,it was a case of borrowing the bus far e - I n a p l ace '-." though our s,::hedule was dec i mated . Here ' s a briefl ike London even keeping in touch wi th everyone can -.....""c"o4u ntdown to closure:be a b ig hassl e unless you have phones. ~Another line of getting suppo rt at th i s period -~was through the GLC. This proved t o be a b l under. ~Richard Barbrook, the sole Labour Party man in Our . ......,_Radie set up a meting through h i s fr i end and b i g nob , lilil!!i!■~~L.\i;~ )in the GLC, John McDonne ll. We went along with i tin the hope of some qu i ck quiet cash for Our Radio. Th E d f o But i t tu rne d out that an y cash would take much time ~ e n o ur Rad1·0 and have to go thro ugh front gr oups like 'commu nity -.,.-,'--, Wed. Dec 15th 82. The police and Home Offic e (now ~ DTI) s li p past our lookout and raid us on top of a'-. ~ Tower Block i n Kilburn. One pe rs on was n ic ked andh t ~ later fined f80 p l us loss of all th e gear. A ' bys ta n -j 11 A\tIh e ft'.~ 1· s •. • der: gets fined for admi~ting 'listening t<;> P_lrate ~ radio', we are off the air for 5 weeks bu 1ld1ng a. • • - A\t\h hei ts.•, :::r::~y 1983. We notice the Home Off i ce are shadow - e ing us, by monitor i ng thei r r adio channel, lookouts, Alt\h eU RG-H! ~~~m:~ 1\_manage to keep clear of them and broadcastWed 23 r d Feb 83. They stag e a full scal e raid on $ us whil e broadcast i ng from a Tower block in Bermond- p R d • ate a sey. But our sec uri ty works and we move ourselves o and all the gear into a f rie ndly squatted flat, wi th 1 n 10 ~ some seconds to sp are. Fuck you Eric Gotts ! Then weput out the story that .we ran down 15 stor i es and :; NOT ;=: / J hid all night i n a cupboard.R l R d ~rr a oo ~ Wed 2nd March 83 . We b r oadcast a full show from Edd- ~ ystone Tower in Deptford. Though the Home Office are U Q 1 ~ about, watching us with night s i gh ts from a neighbouringTower Block, and a police helicopter 'buzzes',- ~ us whi l e putt i ng up th e aer i al. We fin d out somehow,.,,,,, that they can't get enough po l ice support to bustus (there were onl y 3 of us !) . Good sport.5.~"~ ,'M(. '1\~4.l c."r""''t< ~~SWed 9th March. We set up on top of a Tower Block inCamden, switch on, and after less than 10 minutesa half dozen plain clothes cars are moving in, keepingradio silence on their own· channel. We switchoff and just about escape with all people and gearto a nearby flat, as lo ads and loads of th em stormthe building. Shit. No show.Wed 16t h March . Afte r barely a half hour on air wesafely escape from another North London site, asf ive carloads plus a van of Home Offic e wait for thet.ov£ Me.~~ /tl\f:. ~11\ K ~L Wed 23rd March. We' re back to Eddystone Tower, nopo lic e to arrive. This is getting ridiculous .K&, ) options left, so we prepare a 'dummy' TX and aerial 9Y at one end of the roofs, hoping thus to escape. We~ £.. broadcast ·OK till 9. 30, when they move in in force.~ Though we get everything down to the squat in time .,J they now have a search warrant for the flat, and come ~r stra ight there, ignoring the dummy TX. we shouldn'thave been using the same flat again . We l ose everyth'fj · ing, tho ugh only one person is actually nicked.~ March to Sept 83. Much reduced and demoralised byla ck of support Our Radio struggles to raise cash~ ~ for new gear and fines. We make seve r al attempts to~ put out shows on our Ml-/ transmitte r, but itir~ turns out to be a lemon.~Ou r Radio continues in some form as a support group• for new political pirates , and helps Shef f ield PeaceRadio and Rebel Radio in Bristol to get off the ground.The Our Radio 'How to be a Pirate' booklet isrepr int ed (also in the book 'Rebel Radio' though theycut out the enti r e tec hn ical and contacts sections,bastards!) several times, and finally turns into thismanual.ff Yov H,.._T~ 71-\tS ~1-1 TRY :~ff\\O~)(t. -@"Fi:..,M1t1-S1"i l'\A4-,¼ I ZI ~AIL "f~N ~'!'), L<:i,NV4'N5f2 J.,..AndromedaAndromeda Independent Radio began on Jan 23rd 1979 ,broadcasting from the Pennin es to the Manchester, SthEast Lancashire area. Andromeda didn't belong to any organisation, or rent its gear from anyone, they were non•profir makingand decided everything at collec tive meetings .. "We believethat community radio CANNOT be commercial radio ... Webroadcast : Greenpeace info , tapes of local bands , detailsof anti-nuclear/ CND activities in our reception area and detailsof times/frequencies of land based pirates" . They also carried'inver ted advertising' which they called the 'Instant Rip Off'show , publicising goods making excess profits or just beingshit.Andromeda were an excellent advertisement for low•power loca l piracy. They claimed their transmitter hadonly ½ watt power, yet could be heard 35 miles away fromtheir broadcast site in the hills, and they produced recep tionreports to prove it . The TX cost them a mere £6, and theywere ab le to tran smit so far due to their height and by usinga directional aerial with 'ga in' .. Andromeda were partlyinspired by an earlier station, Radio Aquarius, which broadcastin the same area every weekend from April 1971 to May 1975 .Aquarius finally gave up after repeated busts, one which followeda programme condemning the treatment of Black workersin South Africa. Andromeda t-00 went for a long time andwere busted several times before closing down around 1982.Radio ActiveRadio Active was another small a narchist pirate,who broadcast in the Tottenham area of North Londonin 1980. The collective put out a series of excellentprogrammes, concen trating on a nti nuc l ea r andanar cha - feminist issues, before closing due to othercommittments, they weren't busted . People inspiredby Radio Active later went into Our Radio.Radio AvalonRadio Avalon was a 'Fes tival Pirate' a precursor of SheffieldPeace Radio, which took to the airwaves to en tert ain andinform the 30,000 crowd at the 1983 Glastonbury CND Fest•iva l, broadcasting 72 ho urs of programmes. It was very wellreceived, and broadast with a tiny 1 watt transmitter, whichcovered the whole site and nearby Pilton village.6.CambridgeCommunity RadioWe' r e sor ry not to have a ful 1 report on CCR ( seenext edition!). Cambridge Community Radio began asan access station broadcasting music and l ocal communitynews, an d developed in to something more radical,unti.l it was put off the al r, with a seriesof heavy \>usts i n 1983. People from CCR then tookresponsib il ty for deve lopin~ the Free The AirwavesNetwork and Campaign over the next couple of years,and produced a series of well researched t ec hnic al,legal and news bull et ins, befo re pass i ng the job onto a Lon.don based group.SHEFFIELD PEACE RADIO. SPRThe idea of SPR came from Radio Avalon in 1983.At the time some CND supporters were flirting wit hthe i dea of setting up their own media in responseto the alinost total blackout by the press, TV andradio of their activities.SPR broadcast in Sheffield during the CND conferenceon 2nd to 4th Dec. 1983 with a range of wellprogrB11111les on peace i ssues and actio ns . But the CNDhierarchy were host il e, refusing to endorse or adv er tiseSPR (this was the 1st and la st pirate at a CNDConference ). However the broadcast itself was a greatsuccess, partly because of a cock-up by th e DTI andpolice, who persuaded Sheffield's commercial stationRadio Hallam to close down temporarily to aid themin tracking SPR on an adjacent frequency. In the endthey didn 't catch SPR, and when Radio Hal lam closedeveryone retu ned to SPR. Lots of good publicity.Encouraged by this a new, non party collectivebegan broadcasting as SPR on Sunday evenings, startingin Feb 84. It consisted of music, news featuresand interv iews on themes like the Miners Strike, t heanarchist Stop The City demos, the Campaign againstthe Polic e . Bill, Legalise Cannabis, anti nuclear andpeace stuff, and not f orgetting anim al ri ghts. Thegroup deve iope d quickly in to a genuine radical localalternative station and received lots of encouraginginterest and feedback. They also produced th ebooklet 'Sound Advice', advocating THAT MORE PEOPLEDO THE SAME THING. SPR •,1as also active in t he Fr eeThe Airw aves Campaign and friends with Rebel Radi oin Bristol, Radio Pleb and Our Radio in London, andthe short liv ed a.narchist Radio Revenge in Leeds .However on 20th May 84 the police and DTI followedthe bus th~y took to their transmission site (a field)and nicked all four of the SPR team and all thegear. Though fines were lo w (less than £1001 I ' think.and spirits remained · high, SPR stay ed off th1e air.due mainly to lac k of transmitters or th <U,il 1 tyto build them. Rebel Radioin gs Rebel Radio broadcast an ti nuclear, womens.squatters. STC, and miners resistance news and apparentlyexcelle nt music. While cla i min g to broadcas tfrom a 'top secret hideaway' Rebel Radio actuallywent out from the roof of 'The Demo! i tion Diner'the famous squ~ t ea ff and shop i n Cheltenham Road'.Tho':1gh the police made a few failed attempts Rebe IRadio was never busted and clo sed down du e to 'transmitter and group problems'.Later i n 1984 another local anarchist st~tion cameTon the airh in the ~.Bris!to.l ~ area. Aflso ~on su1~al teven~-,y Co~spiracy bu1lt up into a 24 hour per day station. • b~co111ing controversial. - Mich ael Colli s . .. ''W e have no lin-Britain's biggest and only tolerated pira ~e . broad- ks with ot her Pirates. the ones who break into towe rcasting non stop pop and advertising to al~ SE Engl- block s and steal other peoples' electricity are crimand,using a big MW transmitter, from its base in inals and. should be stopped ... '' With attitudes likeTory controlled Sutton Council. Radio Jackie is a this Jack1e got the support of Tory Sutton councilcompany. though it illegally fails to submit Accounts a nd even 2 QC' s, no wonder they weren't busted. (Aor Annual Returns (Radio Jackie Ltd. No' 192~150). It labour amendment in the Counci 1 calling for a tokenwas wholly controlled by Peter Stremes anti q!ichael amount of 'community input' was heavily defeated).Collis . who raked in at least £13.000 from ·advertis- As f1ng, while using volunteers to run the stat~o n . Jack- e ta ~r JPe~~r Stremes (co-o wner . Director and Secriewas no different from any ILR station (those set cas~r ~ iac,ie a nd editor ?f the trad~ paper Broadupby the Tories in '72) except it had noljle of the h d dl e b s a mand of some interest. since he singlefees. restrictions and costs, but as a pirate it was C~~ e ir ~g:~ ~n fucked u_p the . 'Experiment i nunique .. it never got busted, un Y. a 10 · He stands firmly 1n the fascist· extreme right of the Tory party. He's also a spokesm-Jackie put out a popular ''Comm un ity'' im,age with an and writer fo r the Adam Smith Institute and a Dirfree ads for local events. etc •. while stating· often ector of the Centre for Atlantic educatio n in economthatthey were MORE self censo/ng than t he · BBC. and ics Ltd (No 1691243). both of which are f ronts forall other pirat es should be bl!'tzed! ''We broadcast the CIA! He a lso ran his own paper organisation callnothingabout homosexuals , drugs, CND, animai libera- ed The Campaign for Successful Rad io, which advocatedtion, politics or anything that might be considered US style commer cial rad io . Quite a bastard.Community Radio ExperimentThe recent programme for experimental lco'1fflunityRadio in this coun try began, not because of rcainpaigningby th e liberal lefty C011111unity Radio Association,or due to pressure from p i rate s, but because PeterStremes and the Adam S111ith Institute put ! t9gethera report on CR which was accepted by Leo~ Btittan,then head of'the Home Office. The idea was tQ get RadioJackie an open licence. People wer e then invitedto app ly for 21 local licences (for the whole country) and a Home Office Panel was set up to pick the winners.But the panel inclu ded members of the CommunityRadio Ass. (CRA). All kinds of problems arose. andthe decision was delayed again and again, whle severalhundreds of groups applied. Radio Jackie 'stoppedbroadcasting (along with some othe rs) to ,3id theirapplication. after a symbolic bust. There weite moreproblem~. which ethnic stat ion to choose? Hdw to weedout lefty infiltrators? etc. With this CR carrotthe new 1984 anti-pirate laws were being brought in .But the main problem was that the brief give n ,by t heHome Office panel obviously EXCLUDED commeroi a i stations like Jackie and Horizon. When Pet er Stpemes andco realised this (they'd put in an extravagant bidreckoning they'd make £72.000 a year!) they determinedto wreck the who le scheme. It was 2 rears toolate to ,stop the scheme, but they did it, pr obablyby getting their contacts in the CIA and MIS to makefalse repo rts to the Home Office that ther applicant swere all lefty infiltrato rs trying to subvei::-t theTory controlled medi a. But more than that th~y persu adedthe Government of the obvious truth. ; tha t thewhole idea of CR (open access and non cojllmercial,if tightly controlled) was the opposite of Tory philosophy.Among t he hundreds of applicants were a coup leused to scare the government off .. A BLACK ( horrors)stat ion. JBC. supported by 'loony left' · BrentCouncil. and an open access statio n ,Spectrum, sup portedby 'The Peoples Republic of Islington 't ·Eventu ally ( 1986) Tebbit stepped in and announcedthat the whole CR e xp erime nt was being scrapped bef oreit had even begun. as Clement Freud of the Lib erals) commente d .. · 'Could it be that Mrs Thatche ris afraid of the voi ces of ordinary citizens; · thatits alright for Mr Murdoch to take over t~e !Time s.but too dangerous to a 11 ow 21 community s tf t i lons toexperiment".We knew that all along of cours~. andthe scrapping of CR is no surprise to us .IAfter the AxeOur first re actio n to the axing of CR was joy andhope. Maybe the 100' s of applicants would now gettransmitters and go on air. giv i ng the OTI and policean impossible job. The answer to this was a loudNO. Few of the applicants had any real inte rest orcommittm ent and were pacified when the Home Officeagreed to compensate them for their wasted time andmoney . The CRA, as the only recognised lobby groupthreatened its members that if they wen t pirate theywould NEVER get a licence (t he old 'w ait till Labourgets in' trick). There were a few token protests andonce ads on LBC radio were jammed, a group calledAncor briefly threate ned to start an open access pirateand broadcast everyones tapes, but stopped afterthreats fro m the CRA.Meanwhile Peter Stremes and his mates set aboutrectifying the.ir blunder . In Oct 86. at a meetingof the p i ssed off CR appli ca n ts, a new pressure groupwas set up .. the Assoc. for Broadcasting Development.to represent the lobby for legalising co1M1ercial rightwing pirates, on the US model, wit h a toke n 'community'input: If the CR experiment is ever revivedby a Tory Government it will be the likes of the newABO ( and NOT the CRA) who will be vetting the applications.If set up by a Labour Government the originalscheme will certainly go ahead. The same old shitwit h different colo ured bog paper~7.RADIO WAPPING 50 watts Mobile?Radio Wapping kept up regular broadcasts, on top ofLBC, in North London, throughout June 86. Thesetook place at various times, though usually in themorning on Saturday or Sunday.IWe reprint below two art i~le~ from 'Radio Crimes' ...FREE THE AIRWAVES IBCM Box 1502, London WC1N JX~Free The Airwaves is still going strong, as aninfor exchange and promotion group for radicallocal pirates. In this book we reprint their 5wtransmitter design and add their new amplifierwhich takes it up to 25watts. (This amp. can betuned for less power and used to feed the amp.design taking you up to 80Watts). Any technicalqueries, write direct to Free The Airwaves andjoin the network. 'Radio Crimes' is the name ofthe FTA bulletin, and will carry full technicalupdates on these designs, and much more. Tojoin FTA and receive the bulletin send £2 (fororganisations: £10) to the address above.YOU AND THE HIT SQUADSThe idea of a community /neighbourhood RadioStation as part of a countrywide network has neverbeen properly explored. In purely practical terms theviability of Free Radio has always been hampered bythe activities of the 'Hit Squad' of the Dept. of Tradeand Industry (The Radio Investigation Service). Stationsable to afford highly sophisticated gear like astudio to transmitter microwave link have foundthemselves with court cases to be proud of and beenput off the air with the confiscation of their gear.Few involved in 'propagandist' radio can afford suchlosses.Low powered radio transmitters are cheap to replace(around £35 for a 4 watt one) but the mostimportant factor for such stations to survive is tohave the protection of the community they serve -safe houses and flats to disappear into, guaranteedescape routes and refusal to co-operate with the R.I.Swould make such a station hard to put off the air.London could support 480 such stations operatingover 1 ½ square miles, which would in itself makeenforcement impossible. In Japan the manufactureof small FM transmitters (just a third of a mile range)has produced over 700 stations in Tokyo alone.Normal , 'big' radio has produced only one way communicationto a false community invented simplyby the act of broadcasting.A small number of high powered transmittersmeans a greater filtering of input into the station aspr essure on airtime grows and necessarily makes itmore remote from the peopl e who are supposed to beproviding the programming. The only peopl e whobenefit from this are already organised pressuregroups. Anyone with any pretensions to breakingdown the mystification round transmitter and programmeconstruction and providing a medium open toall is deluding themselves if they see high poweredtransmitters actually providing an 'alternative' voice,unless its the spurious 'alternative' of hip capitalism ..no matter how good the intentions, accounting inevitablybecomes more important than content.This is not to say that the use of high poweredtransmitters should be ruled out. Radio communicationhas the advantage of being nearly instantaneous,virtually tamper free and best of all, its possible tobroadcast into areas the state would never allow leftpropaganda to go. In situations like strikes, occupationsand evictions radio is unique in its ability to pullpeople together in mutual aid and defence. Pirate8'radio in ~he service of left wing causes has still enoughnovelty value to attract an audience, and unlike otherforms of 'propaganda by deed' its more likely to winthe sympathy and even the involvem ent of the unalignedj IThe !main contention is that this kind of broadca stingP.3t¥o be on a 'hit and run' basis if its to haveany ch!-1f:ceo f survival .The ;only way of producing an open access, demystifie~democratically controlled revolutionaryradio :ou.t of the hands of the state is for it to be organisedon a small scale neighbourhood basis.IIANT. 1UTHORITARIAN RADIOIEve~ establishment radio station wants us toconf= · to its cosy image of the listener . They assumea we are and tell us what we should be, justto make sure. We're condescended to, given our xmasturkey r~cipe (we all eat turkey, don't we?) a dose ofGod ~we all believe in him/her?) train delays in Surrey( whete we live of course), the shares in the city(that wq all have) flight arrivals from rich paradises(where }Ve spend the winter) . And then there's thetoken. bit of 'community' charity as porky middleaged micildle class males read out a few low paid jobsfor the ~est of us. Then its time for the news valuesstraight from the 'Daily Mail', with anything not favo urabl~t<!>th e state and its chick.lets (the Nuke industry,th~ police etc.) laundered, suppressed and movedto some i tiny 30 second slot after the latest on someroyal. , ,When we're told we have 'Free Speech' its in acontrollJd way. In London we have Brian Hayes, anirritable i pompous man who may give us one minuteto 'ail: oμr views' . Well, Big Deal. In phone-ins, peopleare caget in the radio zoo for entertainment . .listen tothe p~ol s 'getting it off their chest'.The i roadcasting system in the UK reflects all theembr~cm,g State, Monolithic, Patriarchal and Inaccessible.'Ilhe existing system is designed to maintainand rei~orce Law ,Family ,God,Men,Meat ,Military,Might 1 arj.d Money and its not about to be voluntaril ydismantled by the British Government. By handingout a I few lic·enses ( or not, as it happens) the Statehopes 1 tq buy off and neutralise dissent , complaint,protest_~<;l investigativ e news becau~e these ~e ha~fulto its mterests. The monster will not bite off itsown hea~.SQm~ believe its possible _to _useth e existing legalframewo;rk for back door rad1cal1sation but the machinery:o~j the IBA can easily pressurise or close downany of t.q.e stations (if they ever start up!).Campaigning for change isn 't easy but its bestdone by establishing alternative low tech stations ofwhatev~ types (specialist music,political,anarchist,everyth· • g). This would give broadcasting a volatiledangeto sedge and create a climate for flushingthe Bri Hayes and the Steve Wrights away forever,and with this, a climate for more general politicalchange. lf we can reclaim the airwaves that will bea start. 1Pirate PROGRAMME EXAMPLESThere follows two examples of programme~ripts, which may inspire or at least amuse you. The first is from theanarchist/squatters news section of a progr e called The Message, which used to go out across London on theopen access pirate Our Radio back in 198 3. he second is from the Miners' pirate, known by the media as RadioArthur. Both scripts were produced and broa cast by people with very little experience.We have to print them small so that they can fif, ..adio ScriptsSQUATTERS NEWS FROM LAMBETH! In ano~her case they were forced to suspend a ban on ~nteringIntro and backing music 'Dirty Squatters' (punk so~g) .Louder the Rrulton area. All cases were remanded to Dec.16th m Cam- ~l?~f it:~g alliance in Lambeth Council co'[ap~ed this berweU C~::: \~i'.\Y ;c-·' .,.week with the defection of Councillor Gordon ijey~.for the ·t~!~:';~•2nd time!. Mr Ley has left the SDP and will now vote with the ,·,Labour group, giving them a one vote majority Jct bringing J~ture from local squatters.MUSICdown the That cherite council. He claimed high f otives forhis defection, denying he has broken down underJea'!Y pressInJune when mass evictions of squatters became ce tain in La- ,mbeth , Gordon Ley was one of the councillors o ,had hishome graffit ied with squatters slogans and got a fak Notice toQuit his home. Then his lorry was vandalised and th n his shopwindows were smashed several times, and finally h beautifulcar was stolen, graffitied and burnt out ... No wond r the poorman broke! ..MUSICJOY UNCONFINEDThe news of the Council's fall ( especially of the co pt That cherimitation, Mary Leigh) was greeted with joy in the bigsquatted communities in Lambeth . It will mean at 1 ast a delayin the mass evictions and the demolition of th squat tedstreets in Heath Rd and Gypsy Hill, until the equ ly corru ptLabour Party get their act togethe r.MUSICBARRICADING FEVERBut down in Brixton town the squatters are showi g no faithat all in Ted Knight and his new Labour Council. fter all itsonly a fortnight since Labour agreed to and signe the orderto evict and demolish the squatted black clubs althe FrontLine in Railton Road.MUSICLatest news is that at least five houses are being barricadedagainst the police and bailiffs , all face immine t .evictionafter losing their court cases. The collapse of th~ Tory- ledcouncil seems to have spurred on the squatters to difend theirhomes, and they are relying on strong doors and their ownAlarm Network, rether than the whims of corru!Pt politicians:MUSIC FADEOUT ... CRACK OF T~UNDER ...Backing music from IT AL DUB or other suiuj.bleAnd now for a COMMERCIAL BREAK .. (womans v~ice) ..Are you homeless, sleeping out on cold winter stree~?Or are you just fed up with rents or mortgages? IDo YOU resent the Rat Race .. Or are you lonelf and justbored with life?.. I(new voice) Well..TRY NEW SQUATTING TODAY!!Yes tod ay, we can offer you a choice of l00's of fine homes,abandoned by their owners, for ABSOLUTELY IFB.EE .. Sowhy not come along to your friendly squatter\, meetingevery Sunday at 121 Railton Road in Brixton . :Or phone2746655 for more information.SO TRY NEW SQUATTING TODAY.THUNDER and FADEOUT .Intro (Free dom(prison music) louder betweeq items)RI.OT CASES (with 'Brixton Incident' starting in middle)Last Tuesday people nicked in the previous Mondl. ys riot inBrixton came to court at last in Camberwell. Polle had usedsevere bruta lity in at least one case, tried to get an ther remandedin custody and tried to stop another getting eg~l Aid ..9..41MUSICBIG BROTHER (with clips of 'Left,R ight,You're nicked)This week we have more news of new security measure beingtried in the Brixton area and Nott ing Hill. From now on thepolice will be using listening devices and 'o ther surveillancetechniques' . This was in the ' Daily Express' on Nov 15th. Anew instant printout exchange, 1st of its type in Britain,which can 'mon itor' 200 phone calls at once, will also beinstalled in, guess where, Brixton.MUSICMORE BIG BROTHERIt has been announced that the new Brixton police chief willbe Alex 'headbanger' Marnoch, former head of the notoriousSPG. An extra 29 ossifers have been permanently assigned toRailton Road (half of which is now demolished) under somepig called Inspector Bob Bligh.MUSIC . .'Dancing in The Streets'POLICE MADE FOOLS OFOn Wed 18th a local black youth was stopped in Railtonhe refused to be arrested, broke away, and led the police along and merry chase. Even when a vanload of SPG joined inhe managed to elude them all with a classic sprint.End of Music ...... LAUGHTER.And now .. back to our regular spot.. its this weeks TOP OFTHE SHITS (new voice)Well hello there . And this week we have a clearcut winner,in fact today is his birthday , yes its the Duke of Westminster,howdy baby, who owns 15,000 acres in Cheshire,11,000 in Wales, 100,000 in Scotland 900 in Shropshireand thafs just for starters. He has an estate in Fermanagh,shopping centres in Vancouver, a land development in Hawaii,a 10,000 acre sheep farm in Australia and 300 acres ofMayfair and Belgravia back home. This last little plot aloneis worth a cool billion quid, , making it probably the biggeststash in Europe. He's in his twenties and terribly camerashy. We're sorry we can't find his phone number, but he'sdefinitely our TOP OF THE SHITS.LAUGHTERNOTRE DAME OCCUPIED (Hymn music)Supporters of the Radio Libertaire, the Paris based anarchistradio pirate occupied the Notre Dame Cathedral on Saturday5th November to protest at continue d State HarassmentBREAK STRAIGHT INANGRY .. .I'm Angry (poem with backing) cue tape ready)TRUMPETS (womens voice)LADIES AGAINST WOMEN ('Gismo My way' fade in)Yes girls, you too can be a real lady, just listen carefullyto our MANifesto1) Make England a MAN again . .Invade abroad.2) Protec t the rights of the unconceived .. sperms are peopletoo, yet millions are murdered daily! .3)Restore Virginity immediately as an O level requirement.4)Suffering not Sufferage Lets get women out of the pollingboot h and into the maternity ward.5)£1.50 an hour is TOO MUCH for women. Its quite unladyliketo accept money for working!6)Burn homosexuals. What was good enough for the darkages is good enough for the Thatcher years .7)PROcreation not recreation .. recriminalise sex .. close youreyes girls and do your duty for BritainThat~ it girls, so hurry up and join us now .. yes we Ladiesagainst Women are seen and not heard .. join NOW and be seenat urgent unladylike events in proper polyester attire, defend•ing Ladies against Women.(Mans voice)To find out more .. send your name, address and husbandspermission to Ladies Against Women, The Thatcher for AyatollahCommittee, 4 .Whiteha ll St, London ECl..Donations, including Kruggerands or cheques from yourhubb ie or father are ALWAYS welcome . Mister hood is powerful!Why not ask them to join our mens club? ... Ladies againstWomen supports the Moral MANopoly. We have the manopolyon Morality .. and God Incorporated is on our side !TRUMPETS fadeout to Poison Girls I'm not your fuck ingmother.Intro , . .INTERNATION ALEAnd now listeners for some sad and serious news that hascome to us form VOLYA, the bulletin for Solidarity withthe Soviet Working ClassWe are sorry to report the arrest last summer of the mathematicianValery Senderov, a member of the Soviet Free TradeUnion, -SMOT, on a serious charge of preparing and distributingSMOTS underground info bulletin. He is still in prison.Also arrested is Natalia Lazaereva, for her activities in theunofficial womens movement. She has been charged withanti-Soviet agaita tion and -propagandaStill in the Soviet Union, and Big Brother is here too. Wereport that the Soviet Press has recently been honouring the50th anniversary of the death of a Young Communist informer,Pavlik Morozov, who effectively killed his own father bydenouncing him in the purges of 1932 . Pavlik was then killedby his grandfather and cousin in revenge and then they toowere shot. Pavlik was then built up as a Stalinist hero, laud e-·~~.-~,f·- .. _;. .:·, .!J;i:\I10.d everyw ere by the State, with a statue and a Museum in hishome viii ge. Now the Morozov story is kept alive to revive thepurge 'at osphere. Most Russians assume that at least one inten p~op e work part time as State spies .. The CP Central Committeeor instance gets on average 1500 letters of Denunciationev ry day ..INTERNATIONALE fade up and downAnd no a word .from Hungary, where there is conscriptionto joirt e army, and a growing number of conscientious objectors, 0 e of these, Tobor Pakh, was arrested in the Universitychurc for staging a hunger strike to protest the confiscationof hi passport. He was transferred to a psychiatric clinicwhere he ad 3 teeth broken by wardens while being force fed.The insti tions 'experts' stated that he was suffering from"negatio of food" and "erroneous belief". Happily he waseventual! set free after protests by Hungarian intellectualsand Am esty International. This comes from the Austrianjournal, ofil.INTERNAT IONALEet a copy of the latest VOL Y A,bulletin for solidarheSoviet Working Class, from 83 Gregory Crescent,ondon SE9.And now for another poetry spot..th is one was written on May22nd th is year by the 18 year old Jimmy Heather Hayes inAshford emand Centre, the notorious youth prison, wherehe Wa.$ ing held for petrol bombing Teddington police Stationon 3r March at the height of the Falkla nds War. On 7thJu ly Jim y was found mysteriously dead, hanged in his prisoncell, al ne ..... These are his words.(Sth Lon on voice)"I d n't want no partOf y ur death and gloryI do 't want to rotUnd r wooden crossesI ain going to dieFor our fat rich bossesI do 't want a lett erSayi g I died a heroI do 't want a wreathIts ju t a colourful zeroI do 't want no talesOf p triotic deedsCc;,s i s off our deathsThat our system feeds".MUSIC ... j,o r J.H.H .... CRISIS ... PC84.We hope to have more of Jimmy Heather Hayes' poems foryou n~xt wee~. Meanwhile, to roun~ off ~his part of TheMessage n a lighter note, we go over m a mmute to our regularagbn column with Auntie Annie.UR RADIO .. JINGLE .. AD ..untie ..... (middle class man 's voice) ..... .ung go ahead business exec. in a consultancy firm.own house and a sleek car and a nice little wife.All appe well, but still I'm dissatisfied. I'd really like to getto the T P, or get involved in a really exciting hobby. Whatsyour advi e ......... Yours ..... Alienated.Dear Alim ted ........ (womans voice)Yes I qui understand your terrible prob lem. My advice isto go do to day to the Centre Point building in London.Take a lif to the very top. Open a window, break it if it wontopen. Co sider the panoramic view, and throw you rself out!........ with love ....... Aunti e Annie.Sound ffects FALLING CRASH LAUGHTERDear Aunt e ..... (womans voice)I have a p oblem. This man keeps following me home from thetube at n ght. Sometimes he follows me right up the stairs.Today I y lied at him to Fuck Off, but he just stood thereleering at e in the shadows. What can I do?..... you rs ..... desperate.Dear Desp rat.eYou' re qu te right to be worried. My advice is to get a gangof women ogether, wait for him in a quiet spot. Then beat theshit out of the bastard . Can I come? ...... Auntie.Ba,cki g Pink Panther theme fade in and out.And here is a quick word from our sponsors ,ARE YOU ..... running a prosperous business? ealthy butwould like to get richer? Pompous? Seif seek ng1 Opento corruption???If YOU answered YES to all these questios then OU are thesort of chap we want in THE FREE M,ASONS!AND HERE IS WHAT YOU GET! (fade i a,nd out)A super set of handshakes to try out on strangers. 1A super pinny to keep your pants clean when m kiμg DirtyDeals. . .... The knowledge that you're part of an elite grouphelping to keep Britain where it is ...... A super c ip to keepyour trouser leg hoisted! (fade in and out) ,SOUNDS GOOD?? but there's a little catch. We h v~ to approveyou ( we can't have any old riff raff). A big c r· d wagepacket are a definite PLUS.13!24a!bk .i!!nhJ bulletin of Radio Trent, ILR station jA: Coal Grandad ... whats coat?B: Coal's what made this country the workshopIIf t~e world.IFrom coal we've built an empire. We've fough t,1,o worldwars and won. We exported coal all over th ~ rid. Wehad the finest coal industry in the world, an tre finestminers.A: But Grandad .. what happened? 1B: I'll tell thee, lad .. Now, as I recall, a Tory gov rntient gotinto power and then the greedy fool closed do n_l~he pitsdestroyed the mining vilJages and sold off bes' its1to highestbidder. In the end there was nowt left to the miping industry.It were a terrible and shameful waste to hel nation 'sbest assets. It were an absolutely terrible, terrible shiμneC: Mr Oppenshaw ! Wake up Mr Oppenshaw, oufve beendreaming. iB: Dreaming~ That were no bloody dream, that, ere a nightmare.Comrades, dont Jet your cola industry bee m~ a thingof the past .. join the strike now, and never forget that today'Sblacklegs are tomorrows dole queues.(Note : The start of this script is take-off of a Uniga Milk AD,and not a piece of rightwing nationalism! Ed.)(Choir music, followed by the epitomised Nort herntune 'You 're a Lady' by Peter Skellem. Fade to ... )B: It is not the normal practice of this radio stat io to read extractsfrom the newspapers, but this particular ticle has aspecial significance and highlights the real dange Qf privatisation,which are to smash the trade union po er, ,to makethe work force total ly subservient, and to clos down andasset strip any section of the industry that do s not showenough short term profits. The article is from the TIMESnewspaper ...(Reading of a newspaper clip relating to a cabinet sub committeediscussing 'private investment' possibilities ~ the NCB)B: So there you are .. And that from the TIMES newspaper.This could well be the fate of the Nottinghamsh e coal pits.. wholesale destruction of the industry. You have been warned.I Join the strike now and help to fight agains privatisation.{More music ... )B: This goverment is committed to destroying t e NUM atany cost and, according to the City Of Lon on analystPhillips Andrew, has spent £15 milJion a weeks far. Tru lyamazing. Millions of pounds spent on smashing la trade union,while doctors turn away sick people from hdspitals and,in some cases, send them home to die in misery , for lack ofmoney for the health service. I wouldn't trust these Toriesto run a public lavatory.(Glory . Glory Hallelujah .. _) .B: ... We were very pleased to see our brothers fr m! Cortonwoodin Nottingham on Thursday August 23r . ' he men11.Contact us now. If you'r e a suitable candidate you'll be fullytrained in the art of Corruption and finally will pass througha silly and embarrassing CEREMONY, full of mystical gibberishand hoisted trouser legs!Note ... Sorry ladies, this isn't for you .. But if you ask hubbynicely he might bring you along to an overpriced and exclusivedinner!MUSIC fadeoutIf time. Barrier Block + Berlin EvictionsWell we're sorry thats all we have time for this week. After avery short crackle and click we'll pass you on to an hour ofWomen on the Waves, then Gaywaves, Radio Soiidarnosc andfinally late night music from the good, the BAG and the ugly.fade in The Message theme. 'Don't push me cos I'm closeto the edge'from Cortonwood are marching to the TUC Conferencein Brighton. We wish them well and Godspeed.(Welsh Choir ... )B: .. To the Nottingham working miners I say this. If youwant to save the pits, don't believe the lies that the CoalBoard tells you. Don't believe the renegade strike breakers.Don't be fooled by what you SM or hear on the media. Lis.ten to what your union tells you . We care about the miningindustry, jobs, the .futur e .. And now is the time for you tojoin the strike I(Glory, Glory Hallelujah again, building to 'His truth is marchingonnnNNN! ')Voice of Arthurblight~ .!~~ ?~-M" : POLITICAL pira !~ t·adio, ~:an tr iu Brlt~un . is re:iLtn~:ts head again . it has nudgedits way into th'! coalrni::er:1'strike on the side of Arthu r$ca:-;1!i.It Ls th~ fir s!. recorded jn ..stance of a pir:ite radtost. tivn brn c.:astm~ politicalr1iJt~!'ial !-!nee .R.1diu Enochstopped its ra-::ial trca dcastsI when British Te!e,cm i:wes•t1gato:-s g·Jt close. That was I. at the beginning of las t yea r .The pro -Scargi il ;materad:o i. cau:;ing t he Depart•j :n~nt vf ,rJda a~d Tndu,try• ( wili~h hes r.ow lbsorhed thair,\·e.;tii;:atiYe sid~ of BritishTe!~:om pr ior to itsprl' --at:sation) ~ven rncret~oubi~. because it i..s probab!;•beiq operate d from aseries ~'t ;inva te houses or aC.'.H' boo~.T:1e denuncia(icr.s of" S•~ab., '' and the '·~ariatnca~cm:tn I:tn :.racGrc~or .. h3vabeen going QlJt in tht Not•tfr.iham aces on the same:r..edium wA~;e frf:!q1.:nccy(3il1J 35 R~dio Trent in Not•tin,;b~~- Earlier this week!he tr :inSmiS.iiOliS WO!"r!2dl<adio '!'rent e,en mvre br,!,;o go irig out on \'F.F fre •q:ienc:es.·• It is " sir.:;te ~ de..-elop-'mcnt, t..:c1-.;se it m:iy n~c;;~t!ie ;, i" ::i"~~ !°':l '-'C :;."ou~~ ~0-:-::~ I "'·'."v or· 1' 1~~, : .. c 1·n ~.., •l-e ' n• •,- .; i;: • • -ul-, 1,v \.• .. l. •d!!o~ndcnt Lo~:l! Raci:o Srj~II t~~: n· , " s•·n· 'f " n C •17_ c.l _,. :·: ,.~ .... ~ ~ 1~1s,l' l,.nn~Qlr.g ul . ed.. of R .. a.o1'ren~ .For the pas t ">ix weeks;;ro -Scargill Pirtle RJd,o hast~Pn on air onl:,- ~pasmo.i1-CililY, '!xa.c:l y .'.ti the ::amt?tin1e as Rad!o Tren t newsbuileti:15_ :i!r C0les said thathe was not sugges ting thatJ-:i:' Sc.1q~ilI pcrsonaiiy wa$brcaci~..stinz , but extracts Ifrom l::s soeeche:; couid hav~been taped from ra dio, :ele\"isic:1 or ii\·e mecti:i.g.s.:,lr Coles !:as been inund.:ted with te iephone callsfrorr. angry i!H~~-:rs, e:;pe•ci:::ly hC\; SeWiH S W!lO think!hat it iS Radio Trrnt itselfw:iich has :ieea broadcastingthe exhor tations of l! rScar gi!l agai:ast a b:.ckgr,;;indof martial music or Parry';J eru.;alem." Eith er they think it is usand ;lrc angr1·, or they knowit is nl)t us, but th in '..( ·~e aredc i~g nothing ;o stop H:·sai d Yr Co~es. ., BtJt lt i.sdiilicul t ;o s'.o;i bec~:.i.,e :t isCi::!c•.,dt to t:aca the jr').;,d.C3.3:!S b-?caus~ they ,1:-~ Hlspa3mod.i~ and seem to bemode i:c~ diifo·rcnt ,11ce~ ...Radio T:~nt h~s ~om•plain ed to the bd~pender:tEroadcasUng Aufao~i:;-. !heiforae 0'!:~e J~:! t.1-te DT! .l"n!'ort:..1:1::.;e-t~yr .e D71 isshort c: stiff' ~:1 th.e 2'otri ri. ':{•h-l?H 3il!a '.Yhic:l has cu tdo·N;i ::-:r es!iZltions.:'-fr Coles ·,·o:1!d not sa:,Po;)•,\ · li·• .~ pirJ~ )!5 mt ;r..t n:n•1: !·· ;:1;:?ct :-0.:-?d ~nr? sy3~cm" 'JflL~ br o:tdca~t ir.i it$elf top1tt O!l~ i :,; :icv.-e, VHr!'>rodldt :.:;ti . ' ' ! C:v:i·t ..-.. -an; :oh'!lp ?t!".e' r peo;,!c d,, it," ~l'said . "T;dn;s :1.rc Ozdenough as t?:.:-y irt: . ''SECTION 3 A w Id 0 INTERNATIONAL SECTION Or ExperienceThe aim of this section is not to attempt any comprehensiveview of pirates around the world, but toThe Italian ExplosionIt all happened in Italy after 1975, when hund redsof FM political pirates (left wing) took to the air."The idealism of that first hour, when we thought wehad found THE medium of communication .. by andfor the masses". Roun d the clock discussions werethe ord er of the day, as literally everyone seemed tobe on the airwaves ! There were 'autonomists',housewives, anarch ists, squatters, workers, womens groups,intellect uals, marxists, etc, all clamouring to get theirviews across. Everyo ne spoke and sang and put outan incedib le range of programmes. It was a revolutionon the air waves. "We did it for contra-information,against the media and the monopoly of theRAL.what went wrong in the end? Or was it just the 'livefast die young syndrome' at work?".In 1975 there were sudde nly hundreds of suchstations in Italy . But by 1980 there were only l0's,and by 1985 probably not one.The first repres sion of 76 to 77 was quite severe,but the pirates just kept coming back on air and hadplen ty of support. Then in 1977 a new tactic by the12.some examples and exp eriences useful to'Do It Yourself' pirate broadcaster today.state ... t e law was suddenly chan ged in our favour,or so it seemed, as the RAI (State media body) wasdeclared to be 'without authority'.But this soon proved to be a curse in disguise,as sw of commercial pirates began taking to theair. A 1 ng losing battle took place, as their mone yand hig powered transmitters literally blotted usoff the airwaves, one by one . A prime examp le of"free" c pitalism destroying the creativity and collectivityf the people. By the end of 197 7 , as th eirnumbe increased above 2000, commercial andparty b sses began putting stations of up to 40 won the a .The big commercials brought back uniformi tyof pro amming and less and less spoken word. Toraise th ir advertising profits they formed intochains, uying each oth er out and standardisingtheir rea tionary 'formula ' programming.As 11 this was happening the political pirat eswere th mselves being divided, reflecting and repro ducinghe arguments then tearing apart the Movimiento(Movement) itse lf, before stupid and elitistacts of marxist terrorist resistance gave the Stateexcuse for ever heavier police repression, pt~cra-l-ly--------------------~~~~Radio Popolare,5-7 Via Pasteur, 20127 Milano.Radio Citta Futura,Via Buomarrotti 51, 001 7 RomaNetherlandsPirate radio here began back in 1974, witsea pirates like Radio Veronica, followed b a waveof successful land based Medium Wave p' ates. In1979 the police were prevented from seizing M transmitterof Radio Paloma by l00's of outrag d ~isteners.,The first FM pirates appeared around 1 80, andthe growth of the autonomous squatters ovementafter 1979 led to the first wave of Action tations.The Vrij (Free) Keizer Radio was named ter thehuge squatted complex in the Keizers acht inAmsterdam centre, where it broadcast fr m, andwhich proved impossible to evict . Other cif theAction Stations still broadcasting today e RadioRataplan and Radio Vrij Den Bosch. Thes stationsbroadcast mainly squatters and resistance ews andmusic, and went live during big demos and ·ots. Thepolice mainly tolerated them, , except du · g demosetc when the re were some heavy confrontati ns.The Vrije Keizer was the main alterna ive pirate,dividing up its wavelength to allow wome groups,local sq uat groups, anarchists,ethnic grou s etc todo their own radio, but many other stati ns followedin other cities and towns (eg. Stadjs Radio,Oran.ie, Zwarte @ , etc.) Many of these o longerexist, partly due to the relative decline of t e bovementafter 1983, and partly due to police r ids. Alsothe format of such stations has changed, "th more13.stress on sub- and anti- culture, and less on directaction (but this may change again). Neverth elesssome excellent pirates, including the Vrije Keizer,and also Radio Rataplan and Vrij Den Bosch surviveas brilliant examples to the rest of the world.The number of commercial FM pirates explodedafter 1980, with estimates of 6 to 10 thousand (Insiderssay 10 to 20 thousand) pirates totally overwhelmingthe authorities. But this does not seem to have'blotted out' any of the Action Stations, as happenedin Italy (perhaps this has some relation to the flatground?). Each year about 3500 pirates are raided,and there has been heavier repression since the startof 1985, but it still fails to stop them. There is aState plan to open up Cable Radio, in 86/87 as ameans to divide and rule the pirates.At the end of 1985 there was a youth conferencein Amsterdam for pirates from around Europe. Atthe same time a new station. Factum FM had openedup, and also the 'Radio Cafe Marconi' which wasa development of 'open Microphone programmes ,with the aim of direct participation.By 1986 times were changing, though the squatterswere being slowly defeated the struggle hadbroadened a lot, with a whole range of Direct Actiongroups attacking sexism, racism, militarism, nuclearpower,apartheid, pollution etc, giving the piratesplenty to report. In 198 4 Radio Got had developeda wild new style, starting from the Vrij Keizer 'stable'it soon distanced itself from the Movement to take ina wider audience. Activists saw Got as a trendysellout, while the producers claimed they includedall the action news, while adding their own musicprogrammes. And they did bro adcast live frommass squat centre of Wyers, during the struggle toevict and demolish it for a Holiday Inn. Got diedsoon after, and some of her crew went into legalstations, as predicted, while others joined FactumFM, to make radical news and documentaries, as wellas drama, experimental music and open access programmes.-.:,;.~:(:~:,:·•::J··t·: •·{::·•:r· . . . ,:« .-~:'·..❖:::·::•f",ll •• JV rije Keizer RadioThe Vrije Keizer Radio (VKR) was born of theAmsterdam squatters movement, and has stayed apart of it ever since , reflecting the breadth and creat ivity,as well as the internal contradictions of thatmovement . It began at the end of 1979, broadcastingfrom six heavily barricaded squats, known asthe Grote Kf'~:er, in central Amsterdam. After thevictory of tne Vondelstraat Riots in Feb. 1980the Grote Ke1z~r became a symbol of freedom anda big proble for the State. VKR began as a smalllocal FM pir ... ,_ at the beginning of the FM pirateboom, and broadcast on l0lmhz th roughout thegigantic 'Q ueens Day Uprising of April 30th,1980.The Grote Keizer could not be evicted, instead theCouncil bought the houses, and allowed the occupiersto stay there .. on the condition that the Vrije KeizerRadio should MOVE OUT! But this divide and ruletactic turned out to be a blessing. VKR got itselfa bigger transm itter and started broadcasting for 2hours each day from a squat in a differen t neighbourhood(moving each day). This brought muchwider support and interest, and many differentgroups came and went. For a long time the line-upwas Womens Radio (Vrouwenradio) on Tuesdays,Anarchist Radio on Wednesdays, the Pijp area onThursdays, weekends from the Central area, etc.The radio went on like this for years, basical lydifferent groups sharing a transmitter and moving itabout, but it wasn't strong enough (or high enough)to cover the while city, and interest wasn't that high,exceptduring actions or evictions .RIOT RADIO.Whenever there were actions, riots or evictionson a big scale everyone was suddenly tuning in tothe Vrije Keizer for the real news. For instanceduring the Oct 82 'Lucky Luyk' evictions andresistance the VKR went live throughout, with onthe spot interviews and instant information onpolice movements. This could be don e throughreporters and phone-ins, as well as a direct phoneline we had with the 'Scanner Group'. ThisScanner group are basically radio 'buffs' who tune into the police radio (which is not on a public waveband as it is in the UK) and follow them with computerscanners. Important police communications arenow 'scram bled' but it wasn't long till the ScannerGroephad their own de-scrambler. Activists carriedsmall radios with them , often with earphones undertheir hoods, tuned to V KR, they often knew in advancethe exact movemen ts of the mass of riot police, andcould decide their own response in instant street14.meet· g . In fact it got to the stage that, with all ourresou ce and people , we had a better picture of thebattle t an the police themselves, and they too weretunin to VKR to find out what was going on!D ri g that particular 'Lucky Luyk' eviction riotthe p li e made a major attack on the Tetterodesquat d buildings from where we were broadcasting,but w i our list eners heard it reinforcements rushedto th ea, and the police had to fight their way out,only ind they had seized two transformers insteadof th tr nsmitter! Within an hour VKR was back onthe · , laying a crucial ro le in the struggle. Therehave ee several other police attacks on VKR whenbroad <l:asi ng 'riot radio' but up to now they havenever h tured a transmitter.By 1 83 the weekend 'Central Amsterdam' group(mainJly usic) wanted to split off, with the reasonthat ~K was 'too unprofessional'. The solution wasto bui.Jd new transmitters, and keep the present oneas bac~rn . These were payed for by donations, gigs,and tl1e ew 'Flux' squatters disco which had begunin the jT ttero de. The weekend group became 'Rad ioGot' (G d) with a big new 200watt transmitter,which 1th y shared for a time with the Vrouwenradio( womtjns , while the Anarchists and the Pijp groupsshared l a 100watt rig. All the groups still used thesame ~5. mhz wavelength, and co-operated for evict ions,~u otherwise not with Radio Got, who theothers I onsidered too trendy and becomingThe new transmitters covered the whole city, andbetter 'ae ials and broadcast sites were also used. Morevoluntee came forward and things got better, withlots 0£ b · liant programmes, especially on squatting,anti-m~lit · m, anti -nuclear ant i-sexist and thirdW?rld s ggles, as well as many discussions, openm1croppo e sessions and lots of record ings of livebands. i KR also occasionally broadcast gigs or conferenceslive from squatted buildings. By this timeprogra ' es had become more structured withregular n ws times , and background programme' s andfeatures.VRIJE K IZER TELEVISION 1982 - 83.In 1 te '82 a gang of TV pirates suddenlyappeared broadcasting through the cable televisionnetworks (Amsterdam is all cable) They did it afterthe reg channels had closed down, there was alegal hit h in stopping them because the Cablecompany s constitution said the cable had to be leftswitched on. The TV pirates put out crappy mus ic,advertisi g, music videos and lots of pretty gruesomepo . That is except for Vrije Keizer TV(VKTV) which began tra nsmitt ing excellentunshown videos on the squat movement, the Germanmove~en , the Womens Strike, the 3rd World, andads for quatters bars etc. This was the first everanarchb-s uatters pirate TV, and of course it wassuperb; aking and editing videos is however 10times ~he work of making a cassette tape (at least)for radio Before the VKTV really got itself goingwell tqe able company got around their legal hitchand switc ed off the pirates. The VKTV group keptgoing fo a while, making their own videos andtrying to get a regular TV transmitter toget erlatter proved too hard and expensive (since onewas on cable) but the videos still come out.RECENT HISTORY1984 brought new problems and challen es withthe decline of the squatters moveme t . TheSpuigroep (anarchists) finally stopped bro de stingon VKR, and 'non commercial' music piraon the same frequency, these were WHS,and RVZ (a student pirate) and co-operaRadio Got who had become popular, had h ·r TXsto len twice (probably by commercial pira s . TheWomens Radio stopped sharing with Got, w ic splitin two and Radio Twist (an anti-commer ·al musicand politics group) was born . Then the Black W mensRadio began as well, and the new line -up w s KR ..Tues,Wed,Thurs . Radio Got .. Fri & Sat. Radi wist ..Sun afternoon. Womens & Black Womens .. u Eve.Due to regular fortnightly meetings thgroups managed to co-operate in sharing eqfrequency and often studios, despite theirpolitical diversity.At the present time VKR reckons to h ve about1000 listeners at any one time, with everyoin for evictions or major demos. Recenprogrammes have included: Anti prisons, tproblem, the anti -Olympics campaign,lre land/Nicaragua/Iran/Sth Africa etc, a reg~ ••azll■1l 12111 ~'In~ws progr~mme, the anti gas price increases camp aign,phone -m'S, music, etc. Just now we're interviewingold peopl e about their youthful experiences.For a while a left wing Turkish group joined inon Monday evenings, before getting their own stationtogether. But shortly afterwards the ir stat ion ( HalkDer) had to close after heavy fascist attacks . VKRitself then came under attack, after we made a prog rammeanout the Turkish Fascists, the Grey Wolves,and their "democratic" fronts, with the names ofthose involved ( often getting Council grants! ) Theprogramme was jammed out twice by the fascists,but went out the third time, starting a scandal. Theydid not attack our transmitter site, which is a heavilyfortified squat with good escape routes.In 1985 there were furthe r changes. Radio Twistsplit off and Got died finally. Radio Factum begantheir Radio Cafe Marconi. A new GrachtenRadio(Centre) joined in, based on the big Frankrijk squat,cafe and pub, and finally a -German group began Int ernational Radio (½ Dutch ½ German) on Fridays.Due to regular meetings these diverse groups got onOK for a while, but eventually Rabotnik, WHS andFactum got together on l00mHz. By late 86 VKRhad actually closed down, but may now be back onthe au:... •~~I / ~~. • ~• • •SWITZERLAND\\\~~~ u,.,.,,✓,WI'/////. ,,~,,,LORA. Postfach 4 77, 8034 Zurich, Switzerland.West Germany"Radio must be changed from a means of distributionto a means of communication"- wrote BertoldBrecht in 1932, and it is as true today. In East Germanythe State has taken total control of the media,while in the West an unholy alliance of State and bigbusiness contrives to be nearly as authoritarian andrestrictive. Historically the German workers havebeen among the first to practice free radio. Duringthe 1918 uprising and Revolution people took controlof radio stat ions and illegal radio broadcasts(ArbeiterRadioBund) persisted throughout theWeimar Republic.Despite well organised and very serious efforts,pirate radio has now been all but wiped out ( but forone notable exception) in the whole of West Germany.The Action Radios still exist, but have been reducedto doing 10 minute programmes, with newnames every time. And unfortunat ely there aren'tenough 10 minute pirates on one wavelength to makethem worth listening out for. The repression of anynon conformist views, actions or even dress is nowvery heavy, with the squat ters movement wiped outcompletely and activists continual ly persecuted bythe computer controlled police force. It ta kes tenminutes from when you switch on your transmitterbefore a gang of riot police breaks down your door.Hence the 10 minute pirates. Such pirates can alsooccasionally be heard in the Eastern Bloc ( eg RadioSolidarnos c) and in the USSR. The action stations arealways trying to reappear, for instance during bigdemos (eg the broadcasts from moving cars during theStartBahn West campaign against the new US airbaseat Frankfurt ). In Berlin, Radio Metropolis now broad -'.castsfrom the Eastern Sect or, where the position isslightly easier, and Radio Gaga still exists as far as weIn Z 'eh the womens radio, WELLENHEXENand SCH ARZ - KHATZE (black cat) still do somebroa<lct . The police are very quick to attack anypirates ing the British pretext of 'causin g radiointerfe en e'. Radio 24, the huge commercial piratebroadc t ng from Italy isnowclosed down. In Zuricha gro~ f alternative radio buffs and ex pirates gottogeth r der the name LORA and got a legal freqencyo the Sta te when some were handed out in1982. 3 licences were given from 230 applications,to 31 mercial stations ... and LORA, as a 5 yeart. The irony is that only LORA is prospering,d e to membership, donations, benefits andvolun er workers. Its quite a democratic stationand . e c urages listener participation. Differentgroups p t out Womens progs., newsni ght, culture,music, et ., LORA's view is this .. "If the state extendsour Ii en e in 1988 we can see our project as afailure ' .know. T ere are no commercial pirates to worryGermany. Another popular methodin Germany is Break Ins (See How toSection), quick interceptions of programmesn ocal or national radio, usually a quick messageab u a demo, or a responsibility claim for anaction b one of the increasing number of guerrillaresista ce groups .nly and total exception is Radio Dreyecksestory is an inspira ti on. It was begun way977, by a coalition of French, Swiss andGerma nti-nuclear activists, who broadcast acrossthe b rd rs from mountainous forest to France andto the r iburg area of Germany.R~di Dreyeckland began with a week ly duallangu~e programme and the police and PTT (French)had n I ck finding the transmitter, despite attemptedr id . After 198 1 they were to lera ted by theFrenc uthorities and the sta tion split into fivediffer nt transmi tt ing sites, serving different local· Germany and France. By 1984they weredoing 2 ours a day, and then jumped to 6 hours aday, i h broad casts from France beamed to amoun · /for est tran smitter and re-dir ect ed intoGerm . The original anti -nuke pirate was also st illgoing tr ng.T e daily news programmes deal in subjectslike t e environm ent, 3rd World, gays, pr ison ers,ethnic minorities and the independent mu c cene.By this time Radio Dreyeckland had muc apportin Freiburg, with democratic listeners meeti gs supportgigs, membership, donations etc . The pir recei vesno state, party or commercial backing of n kindand is all volunteer, except for a few office w~rkers.The French part is now legalised, but in Ger a y youcan't even apply for legalisation! However in 1985the German State put out feelers about lirnsingsome commercial stations. Radio Dreyeckl respondedby coming down from the mount ·n andattempting to broadcast in Freiburg itself! ,On 20th April 85 Radio Dreyecklandbroadcast in Freiburg, from a studio opepublic . Five days later in a massive police r d theentire building was smash ed to bits, despite dredsof people turning out to defend the station B t theSpain The next tAt the end of the 1970's Spanish radio w s stillmuch like that before World War Two in th r st ofEurope, thanks of course to the fascist die at rshipof General Franco. A year after his death e l Statemonopoly of radio was broken, and a year t r thatthe first Free Radios appeared, along with cial pirates.In 1983 all the Free Radios in Spain ni d inthe CRLE Fede:i;ation and agreed on a o moncharter, to fight against commerce on the o e hand,and State censure on the other . They v t to:1) Keep independent of political partiesunions .2)To promote independent artists labels.3) To trans mit only with a limit ed power, sas possible could get on the air.4) etc.,transmitter coufd not be found anywhere, and meanwhilea second hidd.en transmi tter was continuing theprogramme! Ha Ha. · ··-In July there was a second raid, again everythingwas destroyed, and people were badly beaten up bythe riot police. But _again .. th e police COULD NOTFIND THE TRANSMITTER! Obviously Radio Drey ec~and had spent years in the mountains planningthIS strategy! There followed house raids on radiostaff and supporters, confiscating much gear andpersonal possessions. But by now support and goodwillwere at a very high point, especially in Freiburg,and after a summer break Radio Dreyeckland cameback on the air, broadcasting 6 hou rs a day from Freiberg.Radio Dreyeckland. Habsburgerstr. 9, 78000 FreiburgRadio ClaraApdo. 461 - rel . 963/51.16.88There are by now hundreds of good Fr VALENCIAin Spain, for example Radio Pica, broadcast· g tern- ~ \0ative culture, news and listener particip ti n, 22 ~ Radio Cornelld'. N 8hours a day. Or Radio Luna in Madrid, mo e i~terst- Tf'os. J77.s2.oo/J77.J5.1s ~ °' ~ed in anti· militarism, prison struggles, squat ing, etc., ~ Oornelli{ (Barcelona) i,s ,; 1broadcasting 6 hours a day and support d by its Aikario ~ ~ r:sWorkers. l ~u Ra di os L1 urea, una practica .~..i ~~ So: :~ alternativa o i~. ~ G>There are also some independent an chist O A teneu Libertari :tl < fst at ions among the pirates, for example R d~o Lib- ,:l de Harmonia ,c/ Servat 1r; 111'- 111I ~ ✓ ,:t.Ui:Qertaria in Valencia . ______ i..,1.~ __ ,;_i:i::;_.,;:u::;a;:ra:;::;c::=;o:e::8;::l:;0;o=:•:nJ;;;:.;:.O._ _:: ________ _ DenmarkThere aren't any pirates that we kn w : of inDenmark. Two years ago 84 st ations were legalisedfor a 3 year experiment on local rad io nd weregiven 10wa tt FM transmitters. Of these bout 10could be described as progressive, but o ly one,Radio Sokkeland, in Kobnhavn, is run by alternativegroups. In Radio Sokkeland about 100 activistsput together 45 hours of radio a week. I r,oatljaimed at young people. Commercials are pr hibited,cash is given by groups linked to th s ations17.who can make programmes on the same basis as theworkers, taking a part share in the technical andadmin istrative work. Some of the Sokkeland peoplehad tried a pirate station, a year earlier, but it wasraided and sunk by the police within 48 hours. Nowas long as they can say what they like, they don'tmind being legal. There is some frustration, however,for instance an anarchist radio worker was put in jailin Aarhus for advocating an action on the air.France • Political BatThe pirate explosion in France in the late 70'swas heavily repressed by the right wing regime led byGiscard D'Es taing, and there were a long series ofbusts, seizures and arrests . In France the battle was ~intense from the start, with many thousands of ·peop le involved in Free Radio (partly due to heavypolitical control of the 'straigpt' media) and the ~ . ~\ ~ovL;,State taki ng the 'danger' very seriously.The first to transmi t regularily was Radio Vertein 1977, soon followed by stations like Radio Lorr- *aine of the Longwy steelworkers and Rad io Verte .Fessenheim, an anti nuclear station in Alsace. The '.\Federation, L' Associat ion pour la Liberation desOndes,ALO, (Free The Airwaves) began also in late0 10 6 Zc{ 1'1gH ,£*INTERNAll ONA.LE.'77. ----➔➔----------------Kanak~, gays, etc. But it was the style of RadioMouv ce that made it so different .. "it is a dazzlinghotch- o h, one minute hunger striking prisoners,the ne t ·nute press releases from Actione Directe,then ls· "etc . To facilitate this style and lively participati 5 different phone lines were plugged intothe mi e at all times, leading to a brillian t, if a bitcacaph n · effect. . "We don't want to be legalised,at pre en 3,000 'projec ts' are still awaiting theirlicence i e say that licensing one means censoringthe re), d the licensing process has everything todo wit romoting business and becoming commercial.F r example 15 of the 22 legalised stationshave e dy been bought and sold again, even that ofthe 'ra i al' newspaper Liberation".In the run-up to the May 1981 General Electionthe continued repression of the pirates became anelection issue, with the ascendant socialists supportinglegalisation, and even setting up Radio Riposte,their own pira te, which of course got legalised whenthey won. After May '81 there was a huge explosionof cultural, music and political pirates all over France,with seeming 'carte blanche' from the new SocialistGovernment. But the State moved quickly to controlthe situation. From 1982 a number of 'Radio Projects'were indeed legalised, along with some of theFree Radios, but those favoured were the big commercialpirates, with their uniform music and style,while the State tried to keep a monopoly on the'serious' radio listeners. It became very difficult forthe smaller militant radio pirates to survive and fightoff the superior power (in watts and mon ey) of thesecommercial and State stations. There were by nowseveral Federations, the FNRL with 300 stationswanted to remain non-commercial, with 'civic participation'.Repression began again, gradually, againstthe smaller militant stations who cou ldn't or didn'twant licences, but also against the wave of unlicensedcommercial pirate s. The government was hosti le toan 'Americanisat ion' of the airwaves, and took not eof what had happened in Italy. This worked in favourof the militant anti-commercial Free Radios, tho ughsome left/cultural pirates also wanted to sell advertising.One major success story is that of Radio Libert aire,the station of the French anarch ist federation,which was raided , legalised, banned, raided and isnow tolerated with an extensive listenership. (Seenext section).Another from this stable is Radio Mouvance,which was started by an Anarcho-Syndicalist fromRadio Libertaire in March '83 as a very radical 'youthexperimental' station with open access to a range ofleft wing and minority groups and campaigns. RadioMouvance refused to even consider legalisation, andbegan to broadcast 24 hours a day on an anti-racist.anti-fascist, anti-imperialist basis. It soon became aplatform for many extreme left groups as well asanarchis ts, foreign workers, prisoners, 3rd Worldindependenc e fighters (like the PLO and militantBig~ ney had indeed become one of the mainfactors in the struggle. Mouvance itself had 3 failedattemp seize their transmitter, followed by twosuccess ul raids by the police in July '85 , but camestraight ack on air, despite more threats of raidsand ale ts. The station is anti -commercial, verymuch o, and functions by the support of listeners,worke , nd from benefits. Its main demand is thatpart o t e FM band, 104 to 108 mhz be given overfor no ommercial radio, with no further regulationsb be State. With the return of Chirac andthe ri t in 1986 the days of stations like Radiowere strictly numbered. There have sinceer raids and persecution, and as far as weknow o vance is not presently on air.*uvance: Ave.Trubaine 29, Paris.F ANCE. .. LATE NEWS.. . Dec. '86In *ar· there are now about 80 statio ns on the FM band,as oppof d to a mere half dozen in most parts of Britain. Ofcourse a y of the french stations are pirates, including a hostof rock st ions and minority stations, often sharing frequencies,fo dozen different international tastes . St ill goingstrong t he end of 1986 are Radio Libertai re (89.4mHz) , * Radio ou ance (106mHz), Frequence Gaie, anti-commercialgay sta io (97.2mHz), Radio lei at Maintenant , Ca Bougedans m T te (93.8mHz) and many more.1 B.The Cl s tion ,Voice of America, has a pirate repeater on94.8mH , d there seems to be one right wing pirate RadioSolidari e. n 99.3mHz. 'RADIO LIBERTAIRE .. ANARCHY ON THRadio Libertaire was set up as the pira ~tationof the French Anarchist Federation, and as u~h hadplenty of militant supporters from the start. r:stationwas busted, with strong resistance, then eg ·sed,then rebanned and bus ted, then tolerated, a d · nowcoming under increasing pressure as the ri h takecontrol of France. 'Radio Libertaire soon became much m rjust a pirate for anarchists, partly because t owsRadio Liberta ·There follows an interesting interview wi ' Laurent"of Radio Libertaire on the attacks on t e piratein the summer of 83, and how they were sue essfullyresisted. ·Magazine Libertaire: At the start of summer sJ whatwas happening with the FM pirates , was Radi Ilibertaireprepared for an all-out attack?Laurent: The campaign began with a concert in 'supportof Radio Libertaire, featuring Bernard a11iers ,at the Olympia on June 30th. It was typical of lthe 2months that were to follow: heated, rythmi , , intim ateand full of surprises!"Free Radios .. Watch out for the Holiday " M'amedthe headline of our weekly, Le Monde Li elta ire,on July 7th. A few days befo re, Filliou d, the inisterresponsib le, had said that 11 complain ts h d beenlodged against stations in Paris for "using fre uencieswithout permission" and promised such pira s wouldbe removed after a short delay to allow appealsunder a plan by the Media Ministry. We saw his as aDeclaration of War and began mobilising our upporters,listeners and sympathisers. A hot sum ,upon us.Magazine Libertaire : Was this kind of campaipossib le in mid-summer?other groups to use space on it, partly because of thegood music and 24 hour per day broadcasts, andpartly because listeners could exp ect something muchcloser to the 'truth' from a station opposed to ALLpolitical parties. In any case a very large audience wasbuilt up, which was a big help in the campa ignsagainst attacks by the State. Some broadcasts arere-broadcast on smaller pirates around the country.long, hot Summer19.Laurent: Durin g a Jun e broadcast Leo Ferre ( an anarchistwho is also the most popular singer /songwriterin Fran ce) had proclaimed "You can count on me ifthings get rough and you're put off air" . And further morel000's of listeners were saying "We are withyou". This mass support in July '83 hadn't come bythe flick of a magic wand. Friendships and politi calalliances had been forming on a daily basis since ourfirst broadcast in Sept. '81. Through Radio Libertaire(mainly) the idea of "an anarchist milieu" had comeback after a long absence, allowing us to escape fromthe "folkloric marginali ty" the media and politicianshad relegated us to. Radio Libertaire reached l000 'sof people. A minority were anar chis ts, libertarian sand sympathisers, but the vast majority weren't in anybroad agreement with our politics. Yet everyone hadgot a strong atta chmen t to the station, and this wasclear as early as summer '82 when the 'List of AuthorisedStations' was announced without Radio Libert aireon it. With th is support we were already facingup to our old enemy, the State , in confident mood.The holiday season was however a big drawback, as abig proport ion of our listeners were away fromParis.Magazine Libertaire: How did the summer's eventsunfold?Laur ent: It started with a long period of waiting.Radio Libertaire proposed a 'common front' of allthe Free Radios, but unfortunately there was no lackof manipulations, provocations and attampts at recu peration( even the rightwing paper Le Figaro wasdoing somersaults, waxing lyrical about 'justice andfreedom for the Free Radios') . We steered well clearof this type of activity, and our stubborn determinationwas to be seen far away from the backroomswhere the government and Free Radio representat iveswere plotting ... the liquidation of the Free Radiosthemselves! Our attitude gained us respect and webecame an importan t example to the rest. On 1 7thAug., just as it was being suggested that the governmentmight back down, 'Carbone 14' was busted offthe air, sending a shock through the FM pirates .Radio Libertaire acted immediately against the"vandalism of the Carbone 14 studios". But anotherstation 'Frequence Gaie' were quick to begin broad castingon the same frequency, now allocated to them,and so shattering the so-called unity of the FreeRadios.At 6.00am on 20th August six more stations wereraided by the CRS (French paramilitary police).These were 'Lumiere l0l'(fundamentalist catholic),'Made In Italy', 'La Voix du Cedre (Lebanese pirate),'Radio Tiers Monde' (3rd World) who had all theirgear smashed, and 'Radi o Arabe Paris'.That evening Filioud announced that 'the radiowaveband is saturated, when a plane has 146 seatsthere's no room for 60 extra passengers' ....Magazine Libertaire: In this tense situati on , what wasthe mood at Radio Libertaire?Laurent: Tragic , cos we knew the seizure of our equipmentwas imminent, but our mood was fantastic. Allof us there and the listeners and the militants of theFederation Anarchiste were prepared to fight to protectour station. We had no idea when they'd come so;;everal teams were set up to patrol the area and towarn us by CB's if the police were coming. The studiowas barricaded and we stayed on air 24 hours a day.The phones were ringing day and night with supportcalls. The government was mistaken if they thoughtthe holidays would stop our support. We wait ed, hotmd tense, till 6.40 am on Sunday August 28th .. Amilitant had spo tted police and the informa tion wasput on the air immediately. But by the time we couldsay they were definitely com.ing for us it was too latefor supporters to get in. The police quickly cordonedoff the surrou nding area. The door was broken downby the CRS, those present were being beaten andkicked , and the aerial was cut .But we had got a phonecall through to the pirate 'lei Et Maintenant' (Here &Now), who began broadcasting news of the raid. Listenersand anarchists were already arriving, despite theearly hour, but couldn't get through the CRS policelines . Further away militants in cars were be ingstopped by plainclothes cops pointing guns in theirwindows! Some Radio Libert aire listeners were beatenup as they were forced to watch the painful spect aclewithou t being able to help . Technicians cut downthe aerial, the equipment was loaded into a truck anddriven away, and all those present in the studios werehauled off to the police stat ion.20.Atld hat was that . Worse than the expected silenceon th~ adio Libertaire frequency 'France Culture 'came bn roadcasting early morning Mass!T~er was no question of giving in. The raids weregiven Ith number one slot in the media . From theAnarchis Federation's HQ in Amelot Street the newswent ~u to the 4 corners of the world: the responseIwill be rldwide !A ~it le later in the morning the 'clean -up ' of theFM bt , so dear to Monsieur Filioud, was completedas the C S, using tear gas, seized first 'Radio Voka',then .R dio Mouvance' and finally 'Jet Theleme'.Twenty wo pirates had been seized since 1 7th Aug.ust. :M~i;ne Libertaire :What kind of support work tookplace. 'Laureht: Outside of Paris the French Anarchist Fed eratioi/i oups did a variety of actions as well as petitions.~u the international anarchist movement alsorespoqd d, with actions in Switzerland, Belgium,Ger manyI I y, Australia, Japan, the USA, Mexico,etc.In Mitd d the CNT (anarcho -syndicalist union) wasreceiv~d by the French ambassador, as was theANOn,G in Norway and the@ syndicalist Fed . in Sweden.!' e IF A, SIA and numerous groups, organisations~n publications sent telegrams to the PrimeMinis r In Paris a demo was called for 3rd Sept, towhich! the other Free Radios were invited. At thispoint Ith only way to contact Radio Libertaire wasIth roui· h the @ Fed. bookshop. A few other stationsdid gr a work, especially 'lei Et Maintenant' in givingacces t pirates who had been raided. Withoutstatio , s of our own, we heard our listeners on otherstatio ' s!~~:!r~ /''hffs tt,; ~in sIIII IKTCIIAlft I L,5. "AGlfWt,o,tl<IS t«' AlU 1'11.U!<AG'5Sl LQ'-Sl)l' ' (fl1~£"(C)SUs • tsE ,u .. n:i: ta$1'1'1.fflS111l800S,:.i=~~~~/::J~u11(:lll<l[P tUlQlll ll!~~.:i!~a::oi:..-,·s ·1¥ ,:,,n,r.o.11£W ""ul'Qli U.LUWTUU: Q.s~lll~,_,Dlf!tC!tU• t~rn~ugtl!]'OaJl.l!itME,i, Ht tdt.ll tQIITltltf l't.lltot A'JS0 117II-~~~;u~: e.w_ nrait L •«, U~QUE IC '!Cf'JltkL ' IMA':'TIJll!U,~Otl Ylllt'I MMtl\'A"tltucAIJCIP-~i UD l<:AL M!Otll1i,......_t.1F. .... ~ ... . tc:t,u,1JOO~tf001f!JU~"tU"O"l!lf" t"l/S' Ul!a.llA~r.~?:!~:X" Qla few days l00O's of tracts, posters and a speciale~iti n of Le Monde Libertaire were printed totell ofr listeners of the demo . On the morning ofthe 3Jl'd, militants who had hard ly slept for 2 months,were μia ing the final prepara tions, putting loudspea kersipt cars, finishing up banners, etc. The book shopr packed, beating all previou s records , and the2 phqne couldn't cope any more. The hour of truthwas ap roaching. By 2 .00pm there was no longersuspe*se ... Supporters in the ir l000's were thronginginto the Place De La Republique . The demonstratorsstrean;ie into the Boulevard de Magenta, shout ing'Radio ibertaire will not be silenced' . Banners unfurledreading 'Civil Liberties Union' , 'Pacif t · nion','CNT'. 'Les Occupants Renavoteurs'., 'Lib e ense ','CGT proofreaders', etc. People were in gr at ,mood.No one wanted it to be a sombre fu neral p oqession.Other pirates, including Radio Voka, Carbo e i:14 andAmplitudes FFI had responded to the call. h~ moodwas festive as we began to arrive at the B bfs. Notfar away, in the ~t~dio devastated _ by the . ot !police,Julian , our technician , was prepanng the h1 hl1ght ofI the day: Radio Libertaire, back on the air ! ,The microphones were attached to ticks ofwood, and tha nks to Julian's brilliant imp visation,it worked!..The transmitter was set upon the toilet seat. At 4 o clock Lavilliers' 'To No One' was ready to be broadcast. Ireturned this time there was nothing toexcept the door which had already been s asThe broadcast was heard, on some radi sthe sound gear we had set up in the demo awell received by the l000's of people preseMagazine Libe rtaire: What conclusio ns dofrom this period of Radio Libertaire's histoLaurent : By our determination we wereback on the air, and later to force the Stateinfamous 'permi t ', whereas our enemies, whnumerous, were saying our chances of survival werenil. Though the anti -anarchis t laws are still in place,we have forced the state , the media and the . rest toadmit the existance of the anarchist movement.The main thing that summer was t hat we discoveredsomething new, which I think is crucial for the@Federation and Movement: Radio Libertaire hadfound a true place in the heart of the public.Transalation by M.W. (thanks)•mi LIBERTAIRESPECTACLETSC HANSONSSAMEDI 8 ET DIMANOtE 9 OC10BRE D£ 14 A 24 H~tLUll,Z(~T..a~i,nr.,:~ ~W,.._.~ =~FEDERATION ANARCHISTEBelgium: ry for Pirate Flood.As in Italy and France the first BelgiLibres' began in the late '70s, followed b a delugeof commercial pirates. After a period of t erancethe State began legalising some stations aft '81, andby mid '83 380 statio ns had been legalis ~n FM.Those especially favoured being stations h¥h hadfallen back into the standard 'profession ' :rrmtine.There are two federations, Free The Airw ve~ is thevoice of the 'Radios Libres ', but is losing o t ~teadilyto the commercial Federa tion (GRIB). Th r(1 is stilla deep gap between the Flemish (dutch spe ki*g) andFrench speaking communities, and this is r~flectedamong the pirates . In addition the 'straig ' ~elgianmedia is quite politicised, with the Frenc c!liannelsmainly supporting "socialist" parties, while hJ Flemishbeing mainly Christian Democrat . The 'Liberals"(the fascist party) don't get much air time, a~d havesometimes jo ined up with right wing c m~ercial!IrelandAfter a decade of confusion and a gro ng herdof main ly music pirates the Coalition Go ernmen thave agreed amongst themse lves to license nμmberof 'non-commercial, communi ty managed' st~tions.There are already maybe a half dozen pirat s callingthemselves 'Community Radios' up and own thecountry , and this is good news for them, sp ciallythe famous Bray Community Radio. But t e musicI.pirates to get on air . In a recent scandal Radio FreeEurope (a CIA channe l) made use of a Belgian pirate.So there's a deep division between the 'rad ios Libres'and the co~mercial pirates. In addition, in theFrench speakmg areas commercials aren't allowed onany channel. Its all a bit confusing.One of the least commercial and oldest of theFM pirates in Flanders is Radio Toes tel in Ghent.Itshalf financed by benefits and donations and has ademocratic structure with at least 80 volunteers. In1985 Radio Toestel was given a whole frequency andwent legal, merging with Radio Central from Antwerpen.In Brussels Radio Air Libre has now also beenlegalised,desp ite its name its mainly an art and culturestation , though it does allow groups to make theirown programmes. It was with Radio Air Libre thatChantal Paternos tre was working at the time of herarres t and frame up for CCC bombings (see insidecover). We don't have more info at pres ent about theradical FM pira tes in Belgium.pirates, some of which claim higher audiences thanRTE the State system, will face a crackdown. Typical'divide and rule' tactics. There aren't really any alternativemusic or politics statio ns on the air that weknow of. Surprisingly Sinn Fein haven't got a piratetogether , considering th ey're banned from speakingon state radio or TV .. The Irish rep ublic has also beena haven for international shor t-wave pirates.The Rest of the W or].<lOnce you move outside Europe you're talking aboutvery different cultures and political situations, andthe experience of such pirates is not so relevant .Radio is a part of the internati onal battleground,the medium , for instance was used effectively bothby Hit ler 's fascists, who excelled at mass propaganda ,and by the French and othe r resistance partisans.Afte r the 2nd world war almost every conceivableguerrilla and national libera tion movement had itsown 'pirate ' stations .. the Irgun, the IRA , Basqueseperatists , Kurdish rebels, Spanish or anti-communistexiles, etc ., etc. During the Cuban revolu tio n, forinstance, there were at least 9 stations battling it out ,3 revolutionary and 6 run by the CIA and the Right.The se includ ed the famous ' Radio Rebe lde' set up byCentral AmericaEL SALVADOR.,A good example of a classic revolutionary / nationalistpirate is Radio V enceremos in El Salvador ,broadcasting from the liberated Marazan mountainsdespite continuo us army and air force attacks bythe right wing US funded regime. Radio V enceremosis the voice of the FMLN federation of guerrillamovements and began regular broadcasts on HlthJune 1981, after a year of sporadic 'people's revolutionaryradio' in the capital city. During the '82'elections' the air force failed to bomb Radio Venceremosoff the air, and they had to be jammed out byUS vessels off sho re. The station gives a comp lete 1ydifferent world view to the State media, and is wellsuppo rted by the poor and dispossessed (90% of thepeople). Such radios are an essential part of buildingand participating in a pre-revolutionary movement,in this case one postponed indefinitely by US interventionand the Death Squads campaigns. One dangerof such radio, is that it can perfo rce become cut offfrom its supporters , and also lends itself too easilyto institutionalisation as the 'p arty radio' of the newstate after such a left nationalist revolution. RadioVenceremos has tried nove l ways to gain audienceparticipation, for instance in Jan '86 when they inv-Th e USAIn the US everything is free if you have t hemon ey. Radio and the media at large seem to be inpr ivate commercial hands, though much of it is controlledby huge corporations enmeshed in the Stateand the 'mil itary industrial comp lex'.So, its free to go on the airwaves, but: 1) It t akesyears to go through the licence procedures of thecontrolling body, the FCC. 2) It costs many l000'sof dollars. 3) To get such a licence you need to bea 'r espectab le hierarchically organised group' .WithBoards of Directors , etc. 4) What they give, they cantake away, if you dict by some miracle get a noncommerciallicence they would stop it at the firstwrong move.Che G~evrra in the Sierra Maestra in 1958, which setthe tont ft>r later resistance and 'people's' radio.;FoJ t lle purp ose of examining overseas pirateswe c~ c ivide them roughly into five groupings:Comm41I'cltl / Sub cultural , alternative / subversive,anti-sta~ Community, participatory / and Revolutionary'r a ~onalist.iIn fact the lable 'pira te' itself becomes quitemeaninf1le s, for instance in civil war struggles. Andare not the superpowers, BBC World, Voice of Americaan~tl eir Soviet and Chinese equivalents, guiltyof muc :Vorse than piracy in floo ding wavelengthsin eve YI c• mer of the world with their more or lesssubt le pmi er propaganda?IIIited tJeu audience to gather information on suitabletarge~ f lr sabotage, and send it to a Box Numberin Me*c◄ \ City!I IBOLJ'1IA.Bel~e, e it or not the re is, or was till recently, at olerated 'community radio' system in Bolivia,existinf i ~ongside the State and commercial networks.Slljlc• the 50s, for instance, radio has been usedby Bo~ivian miners in the course of their strugg les,and man 11 mining towns have for various periodssustainid decentralised, autonomous and self mana gedradio with perm ission from nobody, in the faceof mili~ruty dictatorship. Now most mines have beenclosed, i resistance smashed and the miners dispersedas pemjlil• ss day labourers amid total economic collapse.iWeld< n't have info on other Sth American piratesexcept Ith at they are many. One is Radio Liberacion,the vo~k:e of Chilean Resistance, which does 'b reakins'onto State radio and TV broadcasts, calling forstrikes, 1 < emos etc ., against the fascistic PinochetregimeiI"P~bl'k:" radio in the US began to be licensedin the !'5 s (in the US context 'p ublic' means nonprofit 11-n<N OT run by the state directly). By nowone in l:light stat ions are 'public'. One in five of these'public' i s .ations are in the Commun ity Federationand thljis ~laim to 'have no inst itut ional affiliation',in fact i U ey see th emselves as some kind of socialworke~. f he community radio movemen t (now 60statio~9) was begun by the anarchists and pac ifistsof the ,K 'FA station in Berkely, SF, in 1949, andanarchi~t principles were incorporated into thecharter , F PF A still exists today, and is the mainstayof the : P; cifica Foundation (5 stations,one in NewII IYork) which has come under increas· g at-'tack(despite all being "free") in the Reagan ye rightwing group called 'Accuracy in the Media ccusedPacifica of broadcasting 'filth, racism and o 'lmunism'. Back in '81 a National Enquirer expo e creamed'Your Tax Dollars Support Red Broadc te s', butthe licences have not yet been revoked.CanadaCanada has a fairly liberal radio system and fewif any pirates. In Quebec 'Community Radio' is alegal alternative, and in some places is the main localstation. This idea is also strong in Vancouver.While commercialism , rather than the ta e dire.ctly is the controlling force in the US, with o$t stat ionsflooded by inane advertising and pl yiμg thesame few top records, there is nevertheless c 1 a bigrange of stat ions that you can find altema iv s. Forinstance in New York you can tune in t o er 60channels on the FM band , including -lots f ethniclanguage or 'minority' music statio ns if yo I k forthem. In Britain by cont rast you can find j st 4 or 5official channels on FM in most parts of th c untry .The argument that there is no room to legal" e iratesin Britain is demonstrably ridiculous._ti\_) - ~~""\ . . ',We have no information on any pirates atrons in /' . ~the USA. IJa pan, mini T boom .An i ntriguing loophole hascreated the possibility oflegal piracy in Japan.Technical ingenuity hascreated wireless microphones,remote contro l devices forTVs, garage doors and modelplanes all of which usesmall transmitters. To ensurethey are legal, alltrans mi tters whic h generateless than 15 microvolts permet re 100 metres from thesource are excluded from theKIDS af backed by advertiserswanti g a lib eral isa tion inJapan s broadcasting law, andwhen u _licised widely ensuredmost prates were what oneJapan s , in his firsttfr with a style which11 too familar to us,b d incredulously asi h monologues wit hidsregulations requiring Inbroadcasters to be licenced!atpop music!"T k o there are severec li ons on street lifee of the riots in the6 s and after. Evenn4 on the street withoutA tiny FM transraitter ,broadcastiny in the 76~90 MHzband, an d within legal limits,can reach a rad ius of 0 . 3 of amile, an exciting prospect i na crowded city. Manufacturedprimarily for CB enthusiasts,and cost ing £20, thetechnology was easilyavailable, and with 9 monthsof the first tentativeexper i ment 100 stations werebroa dcasting . Soon the mediahad picked up on thephenomenon an d there was anexplosion . By August ' 83 ,just three months' later,there were 700 mini stations!Once again the fantastiGde mand for access all over th eworld was evident. And, a&always there were verydifferent interests involved.The first stations includedtwo which illu strate thedifferences RadioPolybucket, started by freerad i o e nthusi.ast s f,:;-om 1-;·aahoUniversity; and the mediawise Radio KIDS want ing anaudience for their home•reduced music cassettes .restrbecaulatestopppolicButwer mission is illegal .t fe freedom of thees enabled Radiop ~rain to create atflY new kind of event.a~ting from vans theyu a mix of rock r,1u'sic~nd o itical protest againsttne i~it of the US nuclearcarr'er Enterprise. As~oun st rs walke d _the streetsl i st ni , g on their Walkmen,the radio station drovest the m. A mob ile Istation and a mobile aud i encemanaged to have c,...demonstration, a public.meeting and a benefit all atthe same t i me!The Japanese Government isworried, and have proposedways of closing the loophole.But every day that passesbrings new stations. How canthey confiscate so many tinytransmitters, especiallybecause they are so cheap toreplace? And the draconianpowers, not to menti on theresources, needed to fullyext i nguish the movement wouldbe out of all proport i on tothe harm they do .Reflec tin gPerhaps our own pirates aretoo eager to m1m1c normalradio, not j ust in content butin service area as wel l .wanting to broadcast to alarge populat ion makes forrelat i ve l y expensiveequipment, and for fewerstations. If London were amaz e of hundreds of smallpirates enforcement wouldcease! And perhaps, as inJapan, the small scale wouldstimulate some real commun i tyradio.CONTACT: TETSUO KOGAWA20·1 NISHIHARA2•Chome, Shibuya KuTokyo 151Tel : (03) 466 3347How To Be This sectio n tells you exa ctly how to go abou tsetting up your own radio pirate, with _all the tipslearned from bitter experience. First of all here's alist of the main trungs you will need. So you ,vant tobe a rad io p irate? ... Read On.A Radio PirateWhat You'll NeedA. A group of committed peop le who get on witheach other and have plenty of time and energy.B. A programme, presuming you have someth ingwort h saying or playing. You don't even need astu dio to start off with . Just borrow som eon e'sstereo and a microphone and start making practicerecord in gs onto good qual ity cassette tape s.C. A Transmi tte r. Ideally over 10 watt power , bu t5, watt is fine for local broadcasts,o r when using anaerial with 'gain' .(see Techn ical section) . You can'tbuy one over the counter in Britain, but here aresome alte rn at ives:1) Buy one from another pir ate (beware of rip-offs).ll)Buy one over the counte r abroad (see Contacts) .In Italy fo r inst ance you can get a high quality 50Wtransmitter over the counter for £200. You can buykits in Belgiu m, France ,Netherlands,USA, etc . Youthen have to smu ggle it home .lll)Buil d your own.A hobby ist can build a lowpower FM transmi tter from the instructions in thisbook. You7:lll17Idd-on71mplifurrs- late, if youneedmore power. Trv t.o interest radioVHF: Pros and ConsFirst let.s deal with FM (F requency Modulatedbroadcasting , which is your probable choice. Theadvan tage s of FM are many . The transmitters aresmall, light and quite cheap. Reception tends to beeither very clear or non existant. Its excellent formusic and fo'r rec ord ing off and can qui te easily beadapted to transmi t in stereo (impossi ble with AM).A major plus for the pirate is that its easy to hideand t ransport the gear, aerials are comparitivelysmall and can be made collaps able. Its also possib leto put it in a vehicle, even a bicycle, and go mobile,albei t with a smaller and changing re ception area .The average 5 to 20 watt transmitter would be ina metal box not bigger than 12" by 6" by 3" in size ,and weigh not more than 8 lbs with the rest of tbegear (but no t inclu ding the car battery.i f you'reusing one) . The aerial is not on ly shorte r but moreeffic ient and of course more pract ical than the longand tric ky pro cedure for MW aerials. Also low powerFM tr ansmitters ('r igs') can be tuned to slight ly diff -ham s or dissident enginee rs. Its almost essent ial tohave at least one person in your group with sometechn ical know how.1 VJ Get one built to your specifications . There area few e lectronics engineers about who will build themfor a re asonable pric e. Obviously we can't pub lishtheir names and addresses. If you write to the obviousaddresses on the Contacts Page we may be able togive you a box number to contact .D. Ante nna (aerial). You can adapt a design yo urselffrom an antenna book ( eg. The 2 ~letre Ante nnaHandbook :Babani or Tabs book s. or an ama teurRadio h andbo ok). Or use one o f our re ady madedesigns (see Tech. Section). Look ou t for aluminiumtu bing or struts (on skips) which make good buildingmateri al.E. Odds and ends. You'll need basic tools (also lookout for soldering iro n ,multimeter,SWR meter) ,acheap cassette deck, probably one or two good carbatterie s, a roll of co-ax ca ble for the aerial, a ra dio tolisten in on , etc. Also start collecting and readingAmateur Radio Handbooks and an relevant writin.giKEEP YER PEEPERS WIDE FOR. _\JWV ~TUFF!!erent frequencies , on MW you're stu ck on one, unl essyou get a new crys tal.The disadvantage is that VHF -ni is essentiallya 'line of sight' co mmunica tion ... \Vh.ich means thatyour re cept ion area de pends cruc ially on the heightof yo ur aerial above large blocking objects. This is noproble m if you can get up on a hill , or a tower blockbut it does resti ict the choice of broadcasting sites,mak ing you easier to find and trap . \\"ith local broad castingyou have more choice of sites. In very hillyareas, unless you can get up on a mountain, you'dbetter choose MW, also if you want to broadcast toscattered communities over a wide area . Distancecovered with an FM rig depe nds as much on heightas on power. A 40 watt rig on a 15 story tower blockshould cover a 15 mile radius if the re are no blocki nghills. A 4 watt rig shou ld go 5 miles from the sameheight,but if you build a directional aerial "'ith 'gain'you can multiply that power many tim es . You don'tr eally need a big expens ive and ha~d to build transm -itter. Also don 't assume a 100w rig is ten tin1es aspo werful as a 10w oneJt doesn't work like that.To sum up , FM broadcas ting is the ideal for theguerrilla or commun ity pirate, cheap ,mobile andadapta ble . Another advantage is th at there's loads-~---- -of room on the FM broadcasL band ,its lite rally halfempty ,and there will be more when the police eventu:illy move off it. On MW its pretty crowded,and atnight·you' re likely to be blotted out by continentalinterference .The Broadcasting Site (FM).TOWER BLOCKS . the po le and the actual aerial) .In cities to wer blocks ha~e been an ideal answer The advantage of lowe r buildings is that you canfor good coverage and wide recep tion.and are multip ly both the available sites for broadc astingespec ially favoured by co mmercial pi.rates (who often You will have to switch sites as o ften as poss:ble, Alsouse a 'Lin k Trans mit ter' from the stud io to the _tower you will have many more escape ro utes and 'boltblock so as to 'go live'). A further advantage is that holes ' than on a to wer block . Unfortun ately th is maythere are usually electric sockets _ in the lift or heatmg also mean you have to watch more potentialrooms on the roof , so you can Just plug m,provided appro ach rou tes by the police and DTI,and you 'llyou r gear is so adJusted, rather than lug car or lorry need more looko uts if you 're p lanni ng to save thebatteries abo ut. This is 'Stealing Electric i_ty ':of gear when attacke d .cours e, if you're caught boadcas t1.11gth e Electnc1t yBoard could bring this additional charge,though mpractice we' ve never heard of it happening .. Theadvantage of stic king to car batteries is that you canconceal your rig anywhere on the roof,rather th anhaving it righ t by the plug socket, though in a surp riseraid yo \J.r aerial cable will lead them straight to it anyway.POWER FROMINSIDE LIFTROOMLIF THOU::-,VE NTIVHFAER:!:ALL INKAERIALTo get onto the roof of a Tower Block you needa c1ow"ua1,obx ettex a key. The rtremans Keys haveto be standard for ail blocks,so once you have oneyou can get onto most roofs easily . Try asking oth erpira tes, or possibly a friendly caretaker or fireman.Or you can break the door,steal the mortice loc k,get keys made up for it,then replace it,such keysmay not fit all roofs.When on the roof BE CARE FUL (sudden gustsof wind can blow you over at this he ight!) andalways wear soft shoes and keep quiet. Lots of peoplehave been busted simply because the tenants belowheard them and called the police. Its useful to dresslike a repair person, and claim if seen or challenged.to be a lift mech anic . The main proble m with To werBlocks is th at, ii raided, you can easily be trapped.(See How To Get Away With It . I\IEDIU.\1 SIZED BUILDINGSlf you're a local station, o r have a high power rigor an aerial with 'gain' (or if you' re jus~ testing) youdon' t need to be on a Tower Block. Any build inghighe r than most others will do. and you can increaseyour height. for instance by moun ting your aerial ontop of a h igh,weU secured scaffold pole l note:t heremus t then be a woode n or plast ic sect ion bet weenl.!51BROA DCASTING FROM HI LLS (FM )lf your town or city has hills th is is a good opti on ,the high er the better . You can use a piece of dere lictor common lan d, or at night you can use parks, cemetetries or even allotme nts . A bette r op tion is if thereare hill.s outs ide the built up area, then use a field orwood away from ho uses. If you use the dire ctionalaeri al you can cover the city ju st as well. This wasdo ne by Andromeda radio, to good effect ,they usedto cove r most of Manches ter from a hi gh hill outside,using a mere 4 watt transmitte r with directional 'gain 'aerial. If you can get up int o mou ntaino us forestsyou 're even be t ter off and can adopt classicalguerril la tactic s,often see the enemy coming milesaway , and be very difficult to s,top.( See examp le ofRadio Dreyeckland,lnternat ional Section ,who werer-eatt1On a hill with_ip the to•outs, escape r outes,CB 's etc and have regular 'escapeJ;ij .• 'RAclO ~ L I @~~ Lie.ER"T°Af.\~II lttf 1, 1,0b,,5•fr\ . >>- ~ r,,:;- ~ ,__,..C) ~ .... {I(?)drills'. Best place for the aerial is a high,easily climb abletree. If its 11ot too obvious leave it up there andhave a spare ready. An added problem with hills isthat you normally have to lug at least one car batteryabout, which is terrible i1 you have to climb fences,ditches,etc at night (wear gloves and old clothesagainst acid spills ),something like a pram or shoppingtrolley can help. You can't leave the batteries on siteas they need re-charging for your next broadcast .Somains elec tic is a big help if you can run a lead fromsomewhere. Outdoors all your gearmust be in waterproofcases, or covered with a tent or tarp . Tents aregood if you can pretend to be camping. Talce carealso of yourself and your group (you need at leasttwo people,pre ferably four. Hot dr inks ,food,waterproofs,short shi& for look outs,etc are good ideas . Itgets boring a~r a few hours . CBs are excellent,butget ones with earphones if possib le to avoid noise .$00 THEH 0US£ ,WORK!\'M'10NNABAE RADIOP IRA.TE!!in th ese circumstances. If possible make a 'live 'studio in a tent ,caravan or truck and get everyoneinvolved. Try to get men tioned in pre-festival publicity,or do your own,so people will bring radios .This is pirate radio at its best .DEMOS . esoeciallv long ones. like blockades for eg ...of Nuclear Stations or War bases, can be equallyworthw hile.(See Sheffie ld Peace Radio) . In thiscontext the pirate can be a perfect medium fordiscussion,information and warnings of police movements, as well as for entertainment and music.BARRICADED SQUATS OR SQVATIED VENUESare another obvious and much underused site forthe guerrilla pirate, especially during big meetingsor gigs,which you can broadcast live from the roo f.This has been done successfully for instance in Amsterdamand Berlin.such wars.broadcasting from freed zones or neighbouringcoun tries. But you 're not likely to comeacross this in Britain.INTERNATIONAL WATERS is of course a favouritesite, but out of the question for the small 'do it yourself'pirate.GOING MOBILE, from cars ,vans or even bicycles isdiscussed with 'G uer illa Radio' later in this Section .How To Set Up Your Gear. (FM).BEFORE YOU GO (if on mains). Check it works. Wear gloves whenhandling gear, and clean it regularily with cloth andBefore setting out you had best brief everyone, alcohol. They dont usually bother with fin gerprintespecially newcomers, on what will or might happen. evidence,but they might start. The antenna must beTalk about gettin g caught, for instance have good cleaned regularily anyway for good transmissions. Setexcuses made up for being at or near the site . If you up your antenna as high as possib le , if possible on topare planning to give false names, for instance, you 'll of an extens ion pole or length of scaffold pipe . Oftenneed an address where someone ;s~ll confirm you there's a pole already, left by earlier pirates . Attachlive, othel",\1se you might have troubles getting bail the antenna securely ,with bo lts or strong gaffer tape,if you were arrested. In this case kee p your first to a length of wood, then the bottom of the woodOCCUPIED FACTORIES or industrial areas during names the same, to avoid being caught out . (See to the metal po le,(if there). The antenna must NOTstrikes and disputes provide an excellent and often Legal Section}. be touching or blocked by metal . The co-ax can bemissed opportunity for the more political pirate Make out a ~tandard 'check list' of all you_ need, soldered or bolted onto the antenna, or attachedgroup, and can provide vital communication for and go through it before. you set out . Its surpnsmgly with strong,rust free car battery clips. The clips aremobilising,publicising and gaining support . There easy to find yourself on top of a Tower Block, or recommended for fast dismant ling and for testing.ave been many such opportunities m Britain over cttutbiug some tree, only to discovez that yocn cass• and developing ant.enmts,tnatk demly whtch goes·~llt-years. . eu;e aecK 1eaa is at nume uve mues away. where. The c.9_.;1x cable_J;l}ould not be lon geL.t!.1an___abso lutel y necessary ,you lose power with every extraIf on a hill you can also use an ordinary house,flat,squat or de1elict, and just set up your aerial ashigh as practicable on the roof (eg.sliding it up,atopa sca.Uold pole,through a skylight). Its better to geta place,b y squatting or if you're rich. by renting,specially as a broadcast site, no one likes to live underconstant threat of the police sto rming in. In practiceyou may have to use someone's house,then don'tuse it too often. 1f you must use your own placeDONT leave dope, stolen goods , false !D's or othernau gh ties lying about. [t is possible to run yourantenna cable from your house to the aerial onanother roof,and whip the cable off quick if theycome, but tilis would only work onc e, and youlose output power with every extra foot oi co-a.xcab le going to your aeria l. More of this in the 'Howto get away with it' section. NEVER have your studioat the boadcast site. They' ll confiscate the lot,underthe new laws.OTHER POSSIBLE BROADCASTING SITESFESTIVALS, especially large free festivals are anexce llent and common broadcas t sit . A small 4w rigwill do fine. Set up on high ground in a tent orvehicle. and invite the festival goers to protect youfrom possible police attack .much more unlike ly.9]SlT -INS and protest occupations (eg.Greenpeace) areanother good possibili ty ,which we don't thin k hasbeen tried. Especially occupations of high towers,build ings or pylons for public ity. But in this situationcapt ,ure is pretty certain, therefo re a small disposabletransmi tte r would be ideal. A good strategy is foreveryo ne to deny using it,and to use any followingtrial for more publi city ,eg. on the lines that thearmy etc and police are already hogging most of theainvaves .'NO GO AR~AS' are a step up from occup iedfactories . We know for instance that nationalistpirates broadcast from Free Derry and parts of WestBelfast when they were 'no go areas' to the state . Ofcourse there are now no true '110 go areas' in Britain,but there are plenty of inner city estates where thepolice rarely venture .especially in che evenings inthe riot season,for fear of 'concrete rain ' or worsefrom the roofs. A high block in such an area couldbe an excellent site , espcially if you can tip off theloc al you th to lend a hand . Whenever major riotingbegins large areas are suddenly devo id of police ,tillthey can group in numbers and re-take the area.This is another opportun ity for 'on the ball' localpira tes . By monitoring po lice radio. runners , andphoned in repo rts such 'up rising radio' could bea brilliant aid to the fighters on the streets ( seeAmsterdam in lnt. Section ) though you would needgood security, disposab le t-ransm itte r, quick getawayroute s.disguised voices.etc.LIBERATED ZONES ! (Let us know if you findone!) Practically every guerilla or :\'at. Liberationmovemen t,be U1ey right or left wing. has their ownpira te radios ,which are often a crucial influence inHERE IS A SAMPLE LIST OF THINGS YOU NEEDTransm itter (TX) / TX mains lead,or 2 clip on batteryleads(large & well insulated)/ TX lead to cassette deckif not attached/ cheap cassette deck plus mains leador 2 clip ons and 6 volt bike battery / charged up carbaUery 12 volt,il not on mains / Antenna (aerial)check you have the butterfly bolts if coUapsab le) /the co-axial cable ( with plug attached and clips orattached to aerial / fused plug board (if on mains)/programme tapes (rewound to starting position) /small FM radio receiver{s) to monitor broadcasts/CB's for lookouts,fairly essential,( £ 10 licence feeoptional) /plasti c 'gaffer tape' /soldering iron andsolder in case of broken leads /t orch / warm clothes/munchies I bus fare/ .ON THE WAYIdeally you need four people . at least two. Carrythe gear as inconsp icuously as possible, in holdalls orplakky bags. The antenna is a problem . If its a biglong one make it collapsable,using butte rfly nutsin assemb ly. Or try to keep it somewhere close totile site. On arr ival at the site, especially if you'veused it before , send an emptyhanded scout ahead . tobe sure the police and DTI aren't waiting for you andall is clear. Check also you 're not followed.SETTING VPIn the case of a tower block . You shoul d havebeen the re beforehand. and have eithe r a key or abroken Jock. to get straight onto the roof. Lock thedoor qui etly behind you . If U1ere's two do ors ontothe roof have access through bo th. Take your gear tothe lift/ heating room and find a plug in wall socketfoot , and should be good quality and well insulated.Your lookouts should already be on station,withtorches or CBs, one at the foot of the tower (prefe rablysitting in a car or flat) and one on the roof . Keeplow and quiet and wear soft shoes (In one court caseEric Gotts (head of the DTI sq uads) claimed he recog -nised an Our Radio member from the ground, 18stories up,at night.The judge accepte d his word .)When the antenna is up securely, lead the co,axback and pl ug or screw in to the back of your t rans mitter. Now plug in the TX to the cassette deck (TX~transm it ter) keep ing the two as far as poss ible apart,if possi~ le blocked by something solid,like a wall, toA~~" 31:~ . - t'1~fff.,avoid interfe rence . Keep the din lead well away fromthe power leads. Interference between :eads can oftencause loss of power and/or "Sprogs" (unwantedsignals on the wrong frequency).You can go so far asto block leads from each other with l'>ricks.Plug in the cassette deck and the TX to your plugboard (or connect to batteries) and switch on . If youhave that facility just switch on the •,exciter' stage ofthe TX first for testing , no need to alert .Big .Brotherpremature ly. Go to the other end of the roof withyour radio rec eiver and tune in. Then adjust the modulationon you r TX, in relation to other channels , toget the best sound. If thats OK but there is unusualknocking or crac kling sounds try moving the cassettedeck further from the TX,or raise it above gro und ifpossibl e . Try further separating or screening thepower lines from the din lead .You may well find that you have sprogs (hannon icsor spurious signal~) all over the waveband.Checkfor this. ff so check reception with your loo kout100 yards away , normally such sprogs disappear bythat distance and you're OK. But if your signal isstill spread all over further a.way switch off and clearoff. Your TX is fucked up and needs difficult repairor tuning you can't do on site . If you find you 'reinterfering ,vith fire,ambulance or pigs, stop, beforethey come after you. Most pirates are very careful notto do this.When all checks out OK, insert your programmetape, switch off, and wait for the agreed time to begin.With practice you can easily set it all up and test itin 10 minutes, but its good to allow a half hour andto be methodical and coo l. Never,for instance,switchon your TX without the antenna attached,you'll blowit. The amp stage of your TX should get qu.ite hotwhen drawing power, if not its not working. Withbigger trans mitters you may need also a small electricfan to cool the heatsinks on the power transistors.Once you're -on air its good to go and phone friendsfor recep t ion re ports furt her afield.BROADCASTING .... HOW TO GET AWAY WITH ITKNOW YOUR ENEMYbroadcasters can both get pissed off and become apower elite ('I'm not transmitting t his crap! ').phone in a false name at a temporary address orsqu atted flat (NOT your studio) . Tape the call.sand check you're not followed there. For lettersuse a box number (BM boxes are best) and assumeall mail is read. or use a forwarding address. Whentravelling to sites vary your means of transport.Don't of course broadcast your location, realnames or addresses. Don't give your phone numbereither, certainly in Britain , the days of phone- insand instant access to pirates are numbered (seeLegal Section). If you're really into phone-ins get a1/THE RAID .. SAVING THE GEA~½ ( :~. ) ) ) \( A). HlDING IT ON SITE : ; , /Some pirates have tried building the transmitter into : ~•""' • '""'"'" • roof, """""' "'"k' '"· Yoo = ~ conceal it under water tanks . cen tral heating or lift ~' -machmery. Better still have it hidden in a legal or ·squatted to 'p floor flat (possibly 2nd to top would~ do) conceal ing your co-ax cable, either up the side of the building, by boring a hole in the roof, or by the tower block. You can de lay them by sw1tchmgrunning it up ventilation or 'stink' pipes. Another off the power in the lift room , but if doing this bevariation is to have your tape playe r in a flat , and a quite certain yo u're not trapp ing anyone,which islong concealed din lead to the TX on the roof. The difficult. You can call the lifts imme diately ,and ifpossibilities are endless, and most have been tried. you get them first jam the doors open . You shouldOn one occasion Our Radio tried the 'dummy trans- practice for quick dismantling and packing of the gearmitter' trick,with its own dumm y aerial, leading the in advance. Somet imes its easier to leave the antennahounds to one end of the roof,while they left by and build a new one.On a tower block, in London, the DTI squads can ~J another door. Inside the transm itter box was a A good simple 'Cat and Mouse' is to run downtell where you are, within 20 metres , less than 10 can of beer and a 'Booby Prize' note. In all these several flights of stairs with the gear, h ide it in a goodminutes after you switch on. So they can bust you cases you still need to at least remove your co-ax spot (the ideal is the flat of a 'ne utral ' friend) andany time . In the case of new pirates the procedur. e is /. cable before the baddies ani.ve, or of course it'll lead tum into 'norm_ al ' citizens . lf you get stopped have ato monitor you for a while (in case you're just mess- '\ straight to your TX. good excuse for being there.ing about) before busting you . It could easily be a ~ \. . Cat and Mouse is a good system to start off with ..few mont hs before your first attempted bust. If you ")fk B) LOOKOUTS But remember they have done it 1000s of timesplay anything but straight music they will record and For large rich commercial pirates the game is to You need two,preferably three.and take it in bef~re. When they become determi~ed to bust youkee _p all your programmes for poss,ible further use have plenty of transmitters lined up, and not to try tu~s, and tf possib le also momtor pobc_e and DTI you 11 need more and more determmed people anda,gamst you (tho ugh vmce pnnts aren t used m court). and save them if the police and DTI raid. They often radio channe ls. You can use torches or signals from new broadcastmg sites to stay ahead . After a certam-:In-ut!n,r cities they a1@ generan, slo.,er t-e-get after use remote lmks and can often switch 011 and ..,ff ground ta roof If on CBs tum them very low or use point they're _ sure to catch you, as they learn mo_reyou . In smaller towns they dont have permanent staff usil:lg t iroets or radio signals 80 they dant haye to go headphones, and use codewords, they're very public. abo ut you, your faces, your ha bits , your tricks, andso will have t~ ~ome spec_iall~, depend~g o_n yo~ back and change tapes and no one need get caught in Watc~ out for_ cats-or vans with too m~ny aeuafs, as they put mo te au~ m~xe _[(Jen_o n the caw. If youwual broadcast time, so sw1tchmg you r time IS a big the act (but recently the DTI have cracked th is by electncal gear m the passenger seat , hangmg around want to get away with 1t its tune for a complet"advantage. . raiding the 'live studios' and nicking everyone and . . . . . change of t actics.The detection squads are now directed by the everything). trymg ~ot to look susp1c1ous, police cars passmgHome Office through the Department of Trade and But for small community /politic al pirates wi th several times, etc.Keep an eye on nearby tow~r blocksIndustry (DTI) and are officially responsible for only one or two transmitters its essential to save the or anywhere they may observe the roof w1th fieldstamping out "r~dio interference ". They h~ve recent - gear if at all possible . At the same time its now always gmsses. A raid is usually obVIous, _two or thr~-e carsly been reorganised a_nd upgraded with fancy new cheaper to lose all the gear than to get caught and with_ umformed pohce accompanytng tbem (thougheqwpment. Their HQ 1s at Waterloo House by Water- pay the fines. Nowadays even for the small pirate it piggies may be also man unmarked car). They usuallyloo _Bridge ~nd they have several other fixed triang- may be more advisable to put energy into money ~ry .U:d rush in a s1~e or back entrance, so watch out ..ulation stations m London, for mstant tracking . We raising and mass producing cheap transmi tters than its qwte embarrassmg to have all your fnend s 111cked,think their facilit ies are also connected to the GCHQ into trying to save the gear when they 're hot on your and you still standing out fron t ya,';'_ing! Usuall~bases,and MI5. They use also mobile detecti~n vans trail (though you need to guard anyway agatnst the they _take_ the hft (sometunes usmg a f,remans keyand lots of unmarke d cars and have a depot 111 East curious and rip-offs by other pirates). to bnng ,t down fast) and often send a few youngLondon for vehicles and gear. We dont know where ones uo the stairs.they keep their extensive horde of sto len t ransmittersprio r to disposal . They also have their own radiofrequencies , they used to be (and still may be) usingaround 86rnhz, just off the commercial FMwaveband .The DTI squads are not supposed to arrest you,so they have to bring the local filth along on busts,which makes them a lot easier to spot and makesthem less flexible .as they often have to wait till thecops have th e time free.PRECA UTIONSDon't talk or boast unnecessarily about you r sitesor stud io . Work on a 'need to know' basis from thestart . One method is to keep programme makersseperate from your broadcasting team .. tapes can evenbe delivered to a 'dead letter drop' for instance. Butif you can really trust each other its better if everyonetakes a turn at broadcasting, otherwise theC) CAT .-u'-IDM OUSEThis involves moving and hiding the gear, in flats .stair cupboards, lift shaf ts, hanging out windows,disguised as something else, etc., etc., .. ~ormallythey have no case if they can't find it , hut under thenew laws they might cry to do you anyway if you 'recaught. H your looko ut system wor ks you have atleast 2 minutes warning before they reach the top of.29D) DISAPPEARINGWhen the DTI are really on your tail one thingyou can do is take a weeks rest, then come backwith a diffe rent name ,style and tim ing. Of coursethis fucks up to"tally your efforts to make a name foryourselves and gain a regular audience, but at leastyou're still on air, with maybe a few months gracebefo re they start after you again . Also change yourfrequency and voices on tape if possible ..E) SWITCHINGIn theory this is a good system, but you need abig team, your own transport, and two or threetransmitters (on the exact same wavelength). Theidea is this , .. as the police and DTI close in on onelocation, the signal switches to a second site. Eitheryou 're using links, or hav<!copies of the programmetapes. The team at the first site evades the police andsets ofi for a 3rd site and sets up. If they go forth e2nd site you switch to the 3rd site and carry on,etc.When combined with Cat and Mouse tactics this canmal<e you di!ficult to stop. The problems are, ifyou 're using tower blocks your choices are limited ..If you set up say 5 miles away your reception areamay be completely dif ferent, and you'll need plentyof dedicated people ready to wait night after nightto play games with the police .. And when theybecome determined they will still get you . We knowof one South London pirate. who used switchingwith apparen t success, then one night all 3 of theirtransmitters were seized within 15 minutes!Switching would work better when combined andvaried with olber methods of gening away with it.Particularily if you 're doing a local station, where youdon't need so much height . and have lots more choiceof broad casting sites.ins on FM. which may have been used by RadioArthur. This is to use the VVHF microwavetransmitte r, beaming your signal at the microwavedish recieving the signals of a legal station from theirstudio's . The ir dish then picks up your signal, andproviding you 're close enough to be stro nger thantheir signal, you get re-broadcast by their maintransmitte r, thus giving your break-in perfect coveragethroughout their recep tion area.However, we don't have technical plans to buildsuch tricky VVHF t ransmitters. and it would bequite expensive. Thou gh this type of break -in ispossible at present. (To stop you fast, they'd haveto switch off the entire station). They will probablymake it more diffic ult by using access codes toreceiver dishes, as is already done to avoid piracy ofsatellite dishes. (Note: Don't play around witbadapted cordless telep hone, or an 1"'M exciter on adifferent freq_uoncy (or even over an ordinary phoneline.though sound quality suffers) . You also have tomake a small directional high gain antenna. If you'reusing a low power link and a narrow beam its nighimpossible for the DTI to trace yo u.and it wasassumed it was safe to link from the studio. Butrecently studios using links have been raided,in a fewcases , with every bit of equipment, furniture, recordcollection s etc etc seized unde r the 1984 laws (eg, araid on Radio Horizon 's studios in late 85 when over.£20,000 worth of gear was 'st olen ' legally. This maynot however mean that the DTI's new gear can detectlinks. Its just as easy to find your location by gossip,pnone taps or just by following you. Links can makeyou personally safe, if they can trace one you couldalways use two, or th ree ... what they don't and can 'tdo is pro tect your trans mit ter, its main advan tage istha t it allows you to go live from the studio . Toprotect yourself you might as well use a time r ,toswitch the gear o!! and on remote ly. Timers arepr etty easy to build , and you can buy kits, but goodones arc hard to find 'off the she lf' as they can obviouslybe used to make bombs. A good one to buyis the plug in variety, used for fooling burglars whenyou 're on holidays, or by landlords to deter squatters.For remo te switch ing you can also make soundactivated switches, via a radio link , or 'square wave'switches, via a phone line (see diagram in Tech Sect) ..What none of these devices can do however is toturn over a tape, so you still have to go to the siteto do this , unless you want to broadcast for less thanan ho ur .microwaves, they can be dangerous). See also Radio ,,- . ; 6 T C: LI n 6 7r ~F) GUERILLA RADIO . Arthur. Radio Wapping. ~ 1-H- .,.. u_ U I O I 0"'"'7 -c:::J- :t 'mm''('his is on& of the main ideas this book is t rym11 GOING MOBlL E ,.., ,ou "•oa to oonHd•~to promote (See Chapter One). Guerrilla.or Hit and l.n theo ry this is an ideal way of getting away now :a,,ou•~ i c•t th t!; si c na l t l"OID t r-• n•a..t t t e r. ou t t he DT 'I • .,.. now th • )l ' P • CIA'te.h 1n c: up •lO Wll,I o nRun radio is the war of the flea. First of all. yo u can with it, but there are quite a few problems. lf you ' ;~: ::~: 1:r::,. 1 :~• 1• 1:r~:•!":;'~!~ ::•:!:1 : ' • 1:!:~1: ; t . !u :~ 0 0 ::; : .: :~ : :: : : ar•a:: ~:;· on =~v~; :reduce the risks o f gett~g cau~t d~tscally by re going in a vehicle you can use an ordinary cat tn• •~uoto 1 • •• d1tt1cuH !. n ... t:r ac ki n.a . . ... f'z-oa tl'l,e O'SA u .. . t n t:n• r ·~tu e. ..,. ...,. ...broadcasting not at fixed tunes or '_''Ith a f1xed name. cassette player, but you are better off having a •::•::~• h;0.;:•:;~ . ~0.~~• • w:~.! l u t a u t u... .1:- :: ~ ::~~~=•=-•; 0 ~1•~ : •• ~7I ,~,r by doing jtJ),llcy for ½ hour penruis The problem sepmate 12 Volt Cat batteiy to p o t 1111on•~- To do tf\1• YOU .... . o • In tr a -l"ad liftk • t\a v e t he 1. ... .. . OU'Ui(I■ t:h• v l a 1D1 • l"anc■of COW'Se is that yo ur audience is also random and transmitte r One problem is with the aeria, Jlf you ••r-le• 0~ co111ol••· hi40an Un liu . •Ov•nt aa• t l\&_t: fh a l" e r a __ _._... . o ompleta ..la~~.,..te-artct" . , .,..---..,~.,.,..-,_t.h . _ _ ---· • , . . , _ • t On• tr 0 • tlH1 und • C•ct a bl e unl ••• vo u t1nd tl\ e a • .n t r a.veJ. l • r • • d1et a.na•■ wh i ch s~l'rllla idea IS tO gee toge ~a use a bigger: more effic ient one lt w1ll be very •tud1o will. be the NO• t ••cure. u••n•■ltter o r r• c e iv e .- - th • ... .. it extr W lJ.' 0.1ttlcuu t:ofe.w stations.bcoadcasting on ii:e same fteque~cy obvious. one possibility is to h~ve it under a ~~ulin ;:::: 0!":::;:!!7"°': 0!:u,:;mo!:~: :Un:;::10 ";1:\": 0:::1.,.• •:::! Und t:ha c,- • . n .. 11:c e r,.with cheap mass produced transrmtters, thus forming tarpaulin on a roof rack. A bigger problem IS height, ev en .. , er munod. rn1a • .., '" ""one big loose station which listene rs would have a unless you can paJk or drive up and down on a high oe touo wod ov • .. 10.a w• v• u" "good chance oj find ing on air, while being very di ff. h ill, your coverage will be badly blocked. And then ::.; : • ; , ::\:~ : :~.:•;: • :. , '°;:~o no e th • ~ ' v e r o und a r • c • J.Ve l" 1 twon' t e l we.v• be ... ., to tln dM'h• f' • t he • 1 ■n el l • aoain a t ~oe.S o , how aucb o o e• t l\ 1 • a llao■ t'1 St& P t .ln a & t t: ft ■ • tuol o <•-- 1 ... t aon th) You couldicult for the DTI and police to stop. of cowse your reception area will vary radically ••• "••l '"'• to •neBREAK·INS if youtre driving any dist.ance . Not much use for tr a.n;:!~~;; :!~~-neeo to "1orkA • l,l'OU o.n ... . it t ake .•t iae to loo e t.e t:b e e e pl e c ee o t••M1 P-■ nt . And J.t U'l e e c-a tto n 1 •onl. i,, o .,. r a tlt\ e on e di&¥ e ~k .t hel' -av <U •• PD• a r be t or • th eDTl h ave rtnl • h• d cot v e rov t ardo wn t l\e c ha l n , Wtt l\ ■QV 1P••ntha.lelden on b u ildifta■ • rt ndln.■ t'h •ON Cl e• l oo a t 10ft ...,, beha.ltde r .···•a;t: 'CO D-.if &P-OUn d C:lOO 0 .. • o1o r- • -..o n• ou, de c e nt • e t:. ore Qut pa,e nc . Llnk ,aqui ip .. nt wou l d.o oae t o a P0 -1nd ~•oo • l • o .oeo an dt nc v 0 01'1 i t• c oap .1a ,c1 tv . A.••e c- • nd ant:• n"• •v • t • • cou ld tt•t VDi O• llV &t"0\11114 C)OO . de o e "cUn tuoon t:ha •• • et t:,yoe . he 1 c.l'lt &ftGant e ftn.& C&ift. Th an ttn. e .111', YO Uoou.1 c1 ax -oa o t to oaa, •N uno 1:2, 0• • • t:ra naat. tt •• · Tote.J. c o • c-1ar-o un4 Cl, , oo. S u.-• bea t • tl\ e1/2 m111.l on t O'f! lUt!Break-ins are a higher and riskier form of guerilla gaining or developing an audience . The main ••••w•~•t•ro • t he tr•"••••u rradio, as used in this cou ntry by Radio r\rth~ and advantage is that yo u will be much more d ~!;r• :;.::.~ ~c~ t~ : u . !!;ke~. 1!~:Radio Wappint. The idea is to grab your audience difficult to stop. •••Y ,o 10••'" - wn1oh •obybroadc.as.tirlg on top of a legal stati~n. Tl\e Going mobile is more practical as a publicity :::!.!.o ~~•.:.! .:;: v: • v;~::. :;:sentences are much higher (see Legal Secuonl but stunt, or possibly for local broadcasts. To a small mor o """•""· but ~ 1v.n u ...there is little chance of getting caught if you keep extent, h_vaing a bigger TX will compensate for lack :::Y.~ ;;., be ,, : 0u;:~.u !~:~~•'!:~your break-ins short, say for five mmutcs, on top of of height. Going mobile is good for broadcas ting at -•• d1tt1oua " ,. , o 11nd '" •P lt- • t"•· ■ t l l l ha ve th •the news or advertising of a major station. You're random just for the hell of it.taking advantage of a quality of FM broadcastrng Doing break- ins in this way would be gl'eat funthat the stronger signal tends to •win', blotting_ out in the rush hour traffic .the weaker one completely. With a small transmitter LINKS, TIMERS, SQUARE WAVES.you'll only 'win ' for a short distan ce . but even afew hundred yards could cover a whole high densityestate. For break· ihs strength of signal LS the mamfactor. a big powerful! t ransmitter (100 · 200 Watt.SIwould be ideal, and your TX needs to he butlt: andtuned exact ly to the required frequency so you canbreak in with your message on the most popularchann el on pnme time. For break-111sa ll pre cautionsshou ld be doubled. also he sure to clear right awayfrom the area as soon as you've rintshed. and don 'tuse the same time or broadcas t siw again. It's assimple as that _Break- ins are also easily possible on T\ . l>ulonly over the sound.Break- ins are more common in counLries wherepirates have been repressed. e.g. in IV. Germany _orthe Eastern Block. and arc ideal for announcmi:demonst ra tions etc ..There is a,10Lher and !Jetter way of <loin~ break•30.IThese aren 't for the shoestring pirate, though youcan build them cheap if you have the know-how . .\swe said earlie r links of ten prevent you being bustedpersonally. if you can afford to lose the gea1. andallow you to do live progammes. All it involves is1 INFRA RED LIN K FROM STUD I O2 MICROWAVE LINK3 UHF LIN K4 VHF BROADCAST SIGNALi" < 4 .•. / ~ - ·':•,1· ".•.• . . .,. . ...~.. . ''--.~.-- -:·,.--:-,,,,,,' .~--.~. ' , ..... _•,~. :: - using a receiver instead of a cassette deck . ,hen beammgup your signal from your studio. or wherever.using a small t;HF transmmer 1eg on 370 mhzJ orl ea dtn a e dc• o v e r t he DT1. bu tTX L ONOO N ~S A L TE' R NAT:C:VE R AO:CO H .:tC.AZ:Ct-- , £CONFRONTATIONA good trick if you can get away with it. The OT!ind police (they normally only bring a (ew) arewide open to attack ( the mou;;e beco mes thecat!) when coming to get you. The problem is th atin future yo u'll have to change your statio n name,frequency , even your radio voice and they'll alwaysbe on your trall. The good thing IS that if piratesstart attacking them they have to bring many morepolice with them. and can only do it when sparepo lice are availab le. Also they are always look ingover their shoulders, and have co be more carefulwith their surveillance work.One easy way to hit back. on tower blocks .Is ·to trap them in the lifts. The lookout signals upwhen they' re in and you throw the main powerswitches in the lift room. ( Careful you don't trapresidents as well). Then you take you r gear down thethe stairs . heatmg up any of them you meet on the131.Iway, and make off. Their cars are also vulnerable,usually they 're parked unguarded around the comer .If you're going to attack themdirect.ly make sureyou 're well masked and tooled up and have enoughskill and numbers to get past them. Go straig ht forthe po lice officers and disable them befo re theycan make their 'o fficer in distress' call (take orsmash their radios. or have someo ne jamming theufrequenc ies).Other direct ways of hittin~ back are. attackingthe OT! at their oases, attacking their vehicles attheir depot, obt aining home addre sses/phonenumb ers of chief officers and harassing them, etc .etc ..Remembe r, they have the entire state apparatusbacking them up, any form of direct attack shouldtherefore be anonymous and never spoken of orboasted about later. or befo re hahahahahahahah:When the looko ut signals a raid or anythingvery suspicious (e .g. a cop car cr>1ising too closetoo often) immediatelly switch off. dismantle the1;ear and move it tswitch off the TX first. then thetapedeck .DON'T rip out the aerial when the TX isstill switched on!).at? Or better . creating your pirate with? Or areyou really working on your own career? Or tryingto crea t.e 'com munity' in your own head? ...... ...Building Your Pirat£am~Je~<2Js}lt:aun1geuirafgire)you'll wa11t to advertise widely through ethn icorganisations. If you're a ·revolutionary' grouptoge ther , you should think seriously about teamingup with other groups who you broadly agreewith ( or dorit disagree). For example at the moment(late 1986) there are dozens of such groups whohave failed to get Community Radio licences andare dying to get their stuff on air. though afraid to'go pirate ' in the present hostile climate.Local pirate radio is a more clear idea. Thereare many advantages to broadcasting locally, eg.more broadcast sites, harde r to get caught, roomfor more pirates on the broadcast band, cheapereasier to build transmi tters , closer contact and parti cipationof listeners .etc, In a big city its a gt•od ideafor your station to base yourselves in one area.whethe .r you're bro adcasting locally or citywide .Youneed a local base, and local backing,financial if possible.If your station is appealing to one small sectionof listeners it may not however make sense to do alocal station, because the potential listeners arefewer a local station should aim at a fairly widesect ion of the population. An open access stationwould work well on a local basis.as coordinationwould be easier. and all kinds of interest and minoritygroups could be persuaded to makeprogrammes. On a local basis publlcity and suppor1are much easier to get, as is the possib ility of mobilisingpeople to defend you when attacked .. eg. apopular station in the middle of a large housingestate . Local broadcasting in inner city areas cannevertheless involve hundreds of t housands ofpotential listeners. Most of the smaller existingpirates are, in effect, local stations, because of thelimitations of height and the power of their transmitters,though very few allow any access or seethemselves as a local voice and resource.We're not talking here about commercialpirat<:>s, where its Just a matter of having goodfinancial bac king, popular D.J .'s and hit reco rds,plenty of adsjingles and news replayed from legalstatio ns .We're talking about the 'do it yol.U'5el f'co mmunity or political pira te, starting from squareone, and doing something worthw hile and original .The truth is that most commercial pirates, in c!ieixe ffort to offend nobody and build towards apossible licence, practice heavy self censorship andare often as boring,banal,repetitive,cap italist.sei.:istelitist and even as anti-democratic as the lei;:al ones ,t)1ough there are a few exceptions .. Such piratesare obsessed with keeping their technology secretand attacking the 'compet ition at every opportunity.Smaller,non-commercial pirates are in a dillerentsituation.and can only survive and developby co-operation,with the eventual rum of breaki ngthe state and commercial monopoly of 'Her J.lajesty's' airwaves.YOURSELF,First thing you need is an interest in sound,and something worth saying or playing . Get a holdof a mike and a cassette deck and play around withit. Record yoursel f, record any and everythin g.Listen and record off the radio, off TV. offpeople's stereos, in the street. Play back ~·our--- r~-Whe~wrong, and try againNote down your results and ideas and discus, t~emwith others. Read and fmd out everythmg you canabout sound and recording and think about whyyou want to be a radio pirate. Join the Free TheAirwa ves campaign and read their 'Radio Oillles"bulletinsTHE GROUPYou need to fmd more people with ;i.nilarideas, and not just 'hangers on'. You need to get toknow each other well.find out who you C8.l1 tiust.and ditcl} those you can't! Members shollld beprepared to share in the tasks, risks and financesequally ,according to their abilities (in pract ice th israrely happens). Hold regular meetings, justkeeping in touch can be a prob lem in big cit ies . Gofor the maximum openness.so everyone km wswhats going on . Beware of the power freaks . egotrippers, party builders etc .. who are sure 10 ;urnup sooner or later.A good po int to star t is with fund ,ailing.organising gigs, jumble sales, meetings, sp01So redevents or whatever, which can cement your group,attract more people , and advert ise your sta tion.How you do it depends a lot on the type of ·?r<Jjectyou're doing. lf for examp le you're plaming aminority lanl(uage sta tion land there 's miJ..ljons inf31.Iplanning to claim responsibility for armed actions The idea of 'Open Access' is to share ayou wont want to advertise at all. Minority music frequency, studios and even tr,msmitting gearstations are the most common. But we'd adv'.se to start with, with different groups . The advantagesyou to widen and deepen your group, or join witl:j are obvious .. more money coming in from moreothers, if you 're going to build and ·maintain the sources, -less equipment needed to begin with.acommittment (and cash l to keep a station goin_g. pooling of tech nical abilities,. more po!itical clout,Many music stations get backing from clubs, and more participation, bigger audiences etc. A goodare the platform for the disgustingly egotistical and way to approach this idea is by having public meetinaneDJ's who work in tho se clubs . Such solid ings, contact Free The Airwaves Campaign, etc.backi11g is a good idea however . If y.ou're running The problems come with coordin ation, politiastation you'll be hard pushed to fund raise as cal rivalry ,possible infiltr ation and the sharing ofwell. If you see your statio n as part of a wider tasks . For an Open Access grouping you needmovement ( eg. anti-war, womens, gay, anarchist, regular democ ratic meetings of all involved ( atanimal rights,etc) you should try to get regular least monthly) and insist on full attendance. Youbacking from that movement. Another good trick need a few good people who are into organising itis to siphon off small amounts of cash regularily and making it work. Another problem is withfrom council, charity or st udent union fund ed broadcasting . You shQuld aim fQC everyone havingbodi es which your members are involved in. What their own gear and broadcast team as soon as youyou need is income, not a lot,even l:20 a week can, so you will be more difficult to stop by thewould do if regular. I.f some of your members have police snd DTI. So you should inSist on everygood jobs they might be able to do it, otherwise group producing tapes providing at least twoyou could be- tied in with a money making co.-op trusted people regularily both to the broad castor small business. One example of this is the team and to work on the technicai and backupsquatters pirates in Amsterdam, who can get a side of it (building, repairing, pW"chasing etc.).small regular income from a fund raised by a Open A~cess stations depend on cooperation.small tax on drink in squatted pubs and cafes. if you have that then all the other advantages comeOPEN ACCESS into play_, but yo~ are fighting all the time againstOnce your group is going well, and you've O\U ~mg, m th~ society, to be competitive andstarted to make tap es and ,.et the llear aHd cash mdivid~t . 'The_ 1de~ of Open Access .radio nave • ■ t,i! been pioneered m this country by stations like · •·O~Al'l1'~ .... -~=r-1:' ~l~ ·•..st.ET T£RS, T Af'f:\. SvftbllT- ~-,. rZ•E]1.oc.""'-:.I 1'Pv&.ic,ry\ ,--- -'- - Sd,_itED6-fl.ovP ...., juENERAL1 ~ryi>•Dt-1EETIN6-1'c.c.v,! s, I .., No11ts;:_y ,,.., S<.Aff\.S tv s e ~ c..~ovPS.□□□□□□" ,t ,,71 fcoM~w;;J,Community Radio and its worth studying theirexperience quite closely, as well as the exampleof such stations and Federations of pirates in othercountries. (See el•ewhere in this boo!<). Its oftenfatal to allow · one person ,however benevolent theymay seem, to become a leader ·or spokespersonfor an Open Access j!Touping. The straight mediaalso love this to happen.LOCAL / ''COMMUNltY" PIRATE RADIOThe word 'community' has lost any real mean ing,through misuse and over-use ( eg 'Co mmunityPolicin g') . The old styl"e communities are a thing ofthe past (if they ever really existed) except on theSoap Operas, as the system breaks us all down intoindividual consumers. So if you' re talking about"Community Radio" you should be quite clearwhat you mean by it , and what the State meansby proposing (and then cancelling) such an idea.What class. ethnic , inte rest. political or gendersections of the people are you aiming your pirate3.1HOW TO ,\IAKE A STUDIOBack to square one, you've fooled around withtapes and microph ones, but soon you're going towant your own studio. If you have no cash don 'tlet that stop you! Most of the gear can be borrowedto start off with. For beginners purposes a studiois a small room. a couple of turntables and cassettedecks. a microphone,headphones, a small discomixer, a plug board, leads , some records and atable to put it all on . You 'II also need some blankcassette tapes, and sound effects reco rds if you can,( borrow from a record library) .and on the final tape recorder, allow the need le to out) and if doing long pieces you need to 'flash back' is the most powerful publicity and you shouldgo jus~ into the red for music recording, but only the story so far. You need variety and interaction, certainly court the bastards rw ining the localhalf way up for speech recording. For group without sticking in jingles every 30 seconds. Try TV news, thjs kind of appearance really does stickinterviews an omn i-direc tional mike can be handy, and make it interesting/enjoyab le/ente rtai ning both .' in peoples mmds and start them talking .. Strangelyand pay special attention to sound recording levels for you and the audience, otherwise why bother? enough the media are not overly hostile to pira te s,and background noise. Don't use a telephone in the Style and themes are your department. Its easy providing you 're just an oddity , no t a direct threat.,tudio. Though the phone ls the lifeline of democr - on radio to get arrogantly cani.ed away with an idea ' Many media workers hate the shit they' re forced toatic rad io , in the present climate it means you'll of your own ego , or with 'in' jokes or political hobby produce and admire the 'roma ntic' pira tes. Yoube busted and/or have everyth ing in the room horse, watch out for this . Practice with using the should play on this for all its worth , and always tryrecorded by the police .. You really do need two gear, good preparation and research make .everything and get your frequency and broadcast times across .turntables, and at least two cassette decks .. All go much more smoothly . Background music and They will som etimes put you on, as an interestingthese tips, and more you'll pick up as you go along, fading music in and out can be very effecti ve if done item. Remember tha t pirate radio is a 'victimless 'but its good to work out a standard 'how to use well. A large studio, tea breaks etc., help a lot. The crime!the studio' lesson for newcomers . Pay attention to more time you put in the better the result (usually ), lf you 're a mainly music station you shouldsafety, eg have the plugboard (fused) well out of you can spend a whole night making a good one hou publicise where people 1.isten to that type of music,the way, and don't allow coffee or beer near the current affairs programme, for instance. if you have your own club,of course, you're laughing.gear. Read a book on basic sound studios. More than that its hard to say, so much depen d Join Free The Airwaves and get publicity in theirAfte r that its just practice and pat ience, . . . . . . on the people , the subject, the projected audience, paper. Write articles for radio papers, and do benefitknowin g and collecting your material, and getting One last tip, lock it up well,. especial ly if its not ir. the time of broadcast etc,. You shoul d actively go out gigs, public meetings, media stunts, what ever you canmore or better sound gear as you go along. y~ur own ho•~e . and barn cade and cover any and seek feedback and opjnio ns from people you manag e. Choose a catchy, hard hitting l\ame for yourHaving slid that there' s plenty of tips we can wmdows . There 5 one sure thmg about_ accumulatm1: know have listened . Probably you wont be able to do station . If yo u 're doil;tg political stuff they'r e going togive you . A pennanent room is handy . Sound proof sound gear . .sooner or later someone'll mck it! ph one ins and mail is slow and erratic ( dont worry if go for you anyway, so you might as well get valueit if you can, cardboard, layers of carpet,egg boxes you dont get a big postbag,fe w stations or progra- for effort!or styro foam are all good. Try to plan it out before THE PROGRAM ME...... .. mmes really do). Its easy to become cut off and feel Remember, if you want to be a participatoryI you ..tai:t so. a&- co-ha-va-ewi:yth-ing- "'4tlliBg rnaeh ef Uke you re talking Into a vacuum, ot get a completely station, you'll have to go out and seek feedback. Getthe operator (s), while _ having enou~ room for the Th is ~J'.]ti rely up ro yourse lf No need to follo.<~ wrong idea oUY.hat kind of people are listening out on the street an~erev~ atr.---1nterv1ews and group work (See Diagram example) . any conventions. Some peop le say you have to Making programme s is really not th at hard, howe- Take along your cassette recorder to every type ofIf you build your own control desk you can drill ' master' con vention al programming before you can ver bad and inexperienced you are, you can quite event, the more different voices and views the bette r.holes and arrange for all the leads to disappear do some thing different. Other say if you do th at easily improve on some of the 'a ural shit' beingand join up underne ath, much less hassle . If you 're you 'll never do any th ing different. pumped out by legal stations over the airwaves , 24buyin g cassette decks try to get some thing also Again there are some hard learned tips for pirates . hours per day!suitabl~ for outdoor ~ork . Try it out befo re buying, Its good to talk with all concerned before starting,BUILDING UP YOUR PIRATE STATIONeg don t get one which leaves a loud chck on the make a list of all the possib le material gathered (musrecordingwhenever you lift the 'pause' button. ic, interv iews, sound effects, news item s, jokes, orQuality and editing are better if you record your whatever ) and try to pu t it into some kind of order.final product from the mixer onto a ree l to r.eel A signature tune or jingle isn't such a bad idea, astape record •r, thoug h that means re-recordmg people recogn ise the programme by it.ofte n afteronto cassettes for broadcastmg, and a good cassette they' ve forgotten the name. Repeat the name of yourdeck can give ?ear as g~d results and .. is cheaper. programme often, but not too often, along with yourIf buymg a microph one ,ts worth . gettmg a good frequency and broadcast time . Put your important~rrectional one suitable for stu~10 and o~tdo_or items first (eg a demo next day.your appeal,etc) asintervie ws, and make sure the 1mpedence swts its always possible you may be busted before theyour_ mixer. A 'c heap' .£50 disco mixer will do programme ends. If you're expecting a bust put allthe Job (you can even mix through some stereo your best material first and keep the programmeumts) . lf you have the cash_ go for. the flashy short . Use first names (false ones) and try to have an~w .£15.0 range with built -m grap hic equaliser friendly, relaxed atmosphere and give everyonewith which you can do wonders . Another tip, present a go on the microphone and cont rol desk.keep mike leads, din leads and power leads well A iH·· -~· .''" · 'f..seperate from e<1ch other and make sure everything ,' . , •is well earthed (from the chassis if necessary). If I . . ':lsyou also have 'hum' problems with cassette decks ' . · , • ~ L~try plugging in the power lead the other wayround! (ie where it 1;oes into the dec k). Use cheapt urntables. not automatics. and buy ones whichuse cheap cartridges . as you'll have to rep lace themoften anyway. Use good 4uality cassett e tapes however([OK's are just about okay). C120s are bestfor length of program me. but ~et the best or they'lltear or jam. On the tur ntables put m your ownon-off 'cue' switches, for ease of operat ion. WhenJ OU 've ·cued ' a record to where you want to start,:.um it a full turn back , by hand. lO avoid ·slow startup noise. Try and have an LED meter on the mixer13-4.Jthrowing o ut conventions don 't forget thatwe're all conditioned to quick variety and short att ention spans. Long single person interviews are noton . no matte r how interesting, but need breaking up.also rememb er peop le are con tinual ly tun inl( in I andPUBLICITYIts hard to give advice about longer term developmen t, but the re's a few things worth saying. Firstof all its important to pace yourselves . Its easy tostart off with a lot of enthus iasm, then get busted offPublicity is very important, especially when you're the air , or just burnt out with too much work or toostarting off your new station . Of course your main few peop le. However good or different you are youpublicity is to keep coming back on air, no matter will be very luc ky to build up a regular audience orwhat . ~ut if you're hoping for a minority audience mass support overnight. Though your potential no.to tune in specially you need to ad vertise a lot where~ of liste ners may be huge you can expect response tothose people are likely to see or read it. Be warned , \ be slow. Breaking down passive consumptio n of thethere's no real tradition in this country for large scale / media is not easy. Having your own clubs, even ts.support for pirates, and people often tend to regular demos etc helps , as do dramatic publicityconsume the media ie forget instantly they switch - stunts. You need to work out what you 're aiming at.9ff . It could take you a long time to build up the • We say sup port, participation and a large numberregular, particlpating audience, and the solid support of listeners is a good aim. But you may just beyou need to attract new blood, break even financially broadcasting as a way of pressuring for a licenceer.c. (wh ich is a bit of a sellout and a pipedr eam) . Ideal lyIf you 're a local station your publicity is obvious- you should plan ahead and gradually increase yo urly a lot easier, and you can poster, graf fiti or even broadcastin g tim es, while de veloping all aspects ofleaflet your entire reception area. !f you're a 1vider• your station. rather than going all out and thenstation make sure you're always mentioned in the colla psing at the first ' bust' . The best advice then'whats on' papers and get articles or interviews imo . is to opera te weU ,vithm your capabilities, and toany paper likely to suppo rt you. Send out regular join up with any other pirate s who are not commerc -press releases to the local and nation al press. and try ial and no t racist. sexist or fascist. Your longer termto cult ivate contacts among the slimy reptiles aim. as a pirate. should be to reach a situation where(journalists) . .-\]most any publicity is good, as those you have so much support (money, volunteer s. tranpeoplelikely to listen in to you will also likely read smitters, listen er support etc .,I that the state justbehind the bias of the Tory press. Oddly, one place cannot 1vipe you out at will. The hest hope foryou should certainly seek publicity is on radio. try pirates is to swamp the forces of repression by sheerfor instance gettiJ1g onto phone ins . . On rad io you numb ers, as happened , at different times. in Belgium,are already talk ing to people who listen to it! TV. the Net her!ands. France . Italy , and now , it seems. inif you can find any way or stunt to get onto it. Spain. This does not :mply chaos . but cooper atio n .135federations and sharing of the available ainvaves andtimes. This swamping the airwaves is NOT going to becaused by the commercial pirates , hogging, hiding ·and myst ifyin g the technology and even sabotagingeach other. However if we do manage to start anon-commercial movement of pirates capable ofdoing this then commer cial pirates will jump onto theairwaves, with more power, and try to force us off .This would be a major problem .(See InternationalMedium WaveAdvantages and Problems .At the moment FM bradcasting,wi th all its advan tages,is the favourite for pirates . But its well worthpoint ing out tha t at least 25% of radio receivers inBritain can't even receive FM, so you can't pick upmost pirates on older radios , Another thing, in somehilly areas FM broadcasts have a very bad coveragearea. And a third advantage, you can cover a verymuch bigger area on MW, at least potent iaily . MWcan be th e best choice for you, especially if you'rein a country area, or in hills or mountains, or onlywant to broadcast by day and aren' t too worriedabout sow,d quali ty . MW transm itte rs are also fairlycheap and easy to build, and because you use acrystal there's no prob lem with tun ing or with'sprogs' (harmonics). Though the antenna is a hugelength its just a roll of wire, and doesn't necessarilyhave to be up high,which gives you a quite diffe rent,if still limited, range of possible broadcasting sites.MW wor ks by bounc ing radio waves back off thestratosphere, not by line of sight like FM.Of course there 's lots of other disadvantages ,one is sound quality, and ste reo is out of theques tion , and there 's not much free space on thewave band chiefly because of a host of.....E.uro.pean.stations, w'hich become stronger at nigh t, blottingout your r elat ively weak signal ( th is 1s due to atmosphericchange s we are told). The TX is also biggerand hea vier (about 12"X8"X6 ") and you'll pro bablyneed to use car batte ries .One thing I forgot, if you want to reach any ofthe 50,000 prisoners in Brit j ails.you must use MW,FM is still banned in prison , for some typically pettyreason,It is also agreed that you 're generally less likelyto get busted. In the present repressive climate th atswell worth considering.HOW TO BROADCAST ON MW (540 - 1600 Khz).YOUR TRANSMITTER.Enough general talk. So you want to broadca~t onMW. So here's how to do it . First, your trans mitter .Medium Wave transmitters aren't so hard to build,any good amateur radio buff could do it, and there'speop le around who will build them (reckon to spend£100 to £150). The technology is trie d and test.edand our design (see Tech Section) is as good as any.The TX is valve operated and you use a crys tal (whichyou have to order on the chosen wave length) which36,Section,especially Italy.)It is a mistake and an exc use to blame the Toriesand the new draconian laws for the lack of alternativepirates in Britain. The main thing stopping us is thelack of any strong combatative movement ( whetherit be workers, womens, anarch ist, or whatever) inwhich to build a big wave of new pirates, tho ughthere are literally millions of sympathetic peopleabout .keeps you on frequency without the prob lems of FM.So you have to decide from the start which frequencyyo u 're going for and stick to it, or buy a new crystal.When choosing your frequ ency remember that itmust be divisible by 9 .. MW frequencies are seperatedby 9 Khz by in te rnational treaty . If your signaldoesn' t conform you'll proba bly have your signalruined by a horrible whistle, and certainly have theDTI and police down on you faster. If yo u haveproblems getting a MW transmitter you may be ableto buy a kit (See Contacts) or adapt an amateurradio transmitter.~' . ,-,~~~o,...,..f_!_ : , ~.: -ADAPTING A MW IRANSM.I'm not exactly an expert on this and the:ollowmg mto comes from the. OS. Apparently youcan easily buy second hand radio ham transmi ttersand adapt them. The best to go for is the VikingValian t (200watt) or the Viking Ranger (75watt),bot h made by Johnson & Co. These ham radios arewell built, have excellent audio, and moreover havebuilt in VFO's ( variable frequency oscillators) which. make them simple to modify to work on the top endof the AM band. All you need to do to the RF (rad iofrequency ) circuits is to add capacitance to the 160meter tuned circu its . And all you must do to theaudio circuits is to bypass tbe first pre -amp (assumingyou're using a line level instead of a mike level ,One other thing, you must bypass the speech frequencyfilter , which is located between the 2nd pre-ampand the driver.When buying such a 2nd hand ham transmittera) get one with 160 meter capability. b) Don't paymor e than £100 for one. c) make sure it has platemodulation (look inside and check there are twotransformers well seperated from each other), ande) don't get a 'kit built' one with dodgy wiring andif possible check the valves before buying, they'recostly .SETTING UP YOUR AERIAL (Medium Wave).Security precautions and preparation are thesame as for FM. But there the similarity ends. For astart your total aerial length is ¼ your wavelength ,so if you r wavelength was 200 meters, for instance,your aerial would be 50 meters long! You use ordinarythin single strand wire. Buy a roll, keep it on t.hero ll and measure it out, metre by metre . Ideally theaerial would poin t straight up, but thats just notfeasib le, unless you hang it out from the side of atower block or a steeple, or suspend it from a balloo!),(only the balloon blows away). The mormal methodis the 'dogleg' which works just fine (See Diagram ).The ideal site is a field, or deserted common land ,far away from houses , with two tall trees ( only 2if possible ,poplars are best) about 30 to 40 metresapart . No1v strin g the 'dogleg' between the treesand down to your TX with out touching branches orleaves. Sounds impossible? If you have a trainedmonkey thats just fine. Otherw ise try our method.Pract ice and patien ce is nec essary .Bring along with you a catapult, a long reel of70 lb strength fishing line , and plenty of lead fishingweights (not too heavy for the catap ult). Also somesmall plastic rings (cut ou t lids of plastic containerswork fine).SAMPLE CH£CKU ST. Things to :.iring along whenbrnadc~ :,ling on Medium Wave ou tdoors .Transmitter. TX batt ery leads. Cassette Deck . andbatte ry leads. Din lead born Cassette to TX. 12volt and 6 volt batteries (charged). Earth leadsand stakes. Aerial wire. 70 lb fishing line and weights.Catapult. Plastic rings. Disguise gear ( eg kite ,fishingrods ). Screwdriver & pliers. Soldering iron & solderwith 12v trausformer (if possible ). Programme cassso, torches or whistles.and drink . Radio ;eceiven;. Waterproofs (warm ).Possibly a ten! ..Tie one end .,f the fishing line to a lead weight,leaving the line coiled neatly and loosely on a pieceof bare ground. Then fire th e lead Wfiglit from thecatapult right over the centre of a tree! Go and searchfor it (don't try this at night). Tie on your plasticring in place of tJ,e weight and pass about 30 metreof your aerial wire th rou gh the ring. Now get yourmate to pull in the othe r end of the fishing line, ifit doesn't get tangled pull it till the ring is about 5metres from the tree top. T ie the fishing line securely(to the tree), cut it , and head for the second tree.Repeat the perfor mance, firin g right over the treefrom the far side. Pull the aerial end through, and thistime tie it to the ring. Pul l up as befo re to about 5mfrom the top and tie the line. Now back to the rollof aerial wire (extende d with fishing line as necc.)and start pulling it in till its suspend ed withouttouching the trees! Its hard to get it just 1ight so theaerial reaches your X and is tight, adjust fishing linelengths and/or pos ition of TX. Better choose twotrees too far apart than too close. When you finallyget it all set its h,mlly worth taking it down againafter the broadcast, thou gh you should loosen it offor it'll snap in the wina.D isguise it if possible. A furtherprob lem can be with kids and passers by,disguise your actions, bringing along fishing rods ora kite is a good ploy. One of the best broadcast sitesis a clearing in a large wood. On Med ium Waverem ember, you can go right outs ide the city and stillcover it and lo ts mo re besides .~ IM .W. AERIAL~ ,s,..~,~ ..C "'\'f"-'>I«.Q:r •o.l w 01-.At_'I'' S Nle'\ae.<S!o ff ')-1,(,<[ISETTING UP THE GEAR ( Medium Wave ).See the Diagram. The transm it ter should be onwet ground. If its dry, wet it . Mud is good stuff. Theaerial wire should be taut all the way . Bushes are anadvantage, for concealment, but don't let any touchthe aerial. You power suppl y is a 12 volt car battery .Bring two, well charg ed up, if you're broadcasting formore than a few hours, Medium wave uses lots ofpower. If your TX is on mains (240 vAC) you 'll haveto get it adap ted using a 'rotary inverter', its notdifficult. A lorry battery is the real thing, but what adrag to carry! If there's a chance to go on mains, byrunning a line from somewhere, you should go for it.Otherwise wear old clothes and gloves against acid----Spills.-W},eo cboasing yam site balance the need for37.:""'"'"'--r>.~ i .,,.11-fl/Jl~\J.· _· .,,.,, LI._..., . I4~ \-'°S,AKt:sremoteness with the problems of moving the gear.The Trans mitter must be very well earthed, theearth is an essentia l part of the aerial system. Use aring of metal stakes (eg tent stakes) and file off anyrust or dirt for good connections . Attach the stakessecurely to the chassis of your TX, with thick metalstraps or wires held by butterfly nuts or strong cleanbattery clips.So far so good . The cassette player, on the cont rary,sho uld be off the ground, on a box or whatever.As usual keep the din lead, battery leads , and aerialwire as far apart from each othe r as possible. Thecassette player is normally powered by a 6 volt motorbike battery, with suitabl e leads. Torch batteries aredear and have a pathetic lifespan.SWITCHING ONConnect up your batteri es, load up your cassetteplayer with a 'I.rial tap e' and you're ready to go. (SeeDiagram B ):1) Tum tuning adjuster to the right till the metergives the lowest rending.2) Tum 'load' adjuster till meter rises about 50 milli•amps.3) Tune again till it drop s about 25 Ma.4) Load up again as above .5) Carry 011 procedure till you get a load of about150Ma on a 20 watt transmitter, or 1001\ta oo a 10watt rig. Yow last tuning adjusbnent should produ cevirtual ly no dip on the mete .r needle.6) Adjust modulation in relati on to othe r channel sto get your best sound . Ulle a radio rece iver held atleast 50 yards away for testing.7) If there is ccac!tling, knocking or bad sound , repeatfrom the beginning. Check that your stakes are inwe ll to damp ground, that all lines are well separa ted,that aerial isn 't to uching tre es, hold receiver furt heraway, etc .PACKING UPWhen you're finished switch off immediately.Then disconnec t everything and pack into holdallsor large plast ic bag. Be especially careful carryingthe TX with its delicate valves. You should haveseveral sites, and switch as often as you crui. Don'tre-use a site afte r an attem pted bust. If you have agood dry safe stash and are coming back best leaveyour transmitter,cassette deck and leads the re, andjust take the batte ries back for rechar ging. Such astash should be in cover, be quite sure a hiddenwatche r or bod with binoculars couldn't spot youstashing the gear. Its likely that the DTI will send inmen to sneak up and watch yo u, prior to planninga bust, so be careful, even when not on air, don'trelax till safely home.and fingerprin t yo u. You can't refu .se under thenew Police Bill.When nicked your best bet is to remain calm.Demand to ring your solicito r. Don't panic, it 'snot the end or the world . Smile at the bastar ds.Have a good !tip in the cell • you've done your best.FrGHTING YOUR CASE. (See Legal Sectio n ).I t's usually months before your summon s arrives,if they decide they have a case. Get legal aid if at allpossib le, and a good solicitor who knows the,by now,pretty complex legal situation. Plead NOT GUILTY ,but beware if :vou have money, they may award costssto ry for your solic itor to te ll, its always good to sayyou're just getting marri ed /starting a new job,etcbut do n 't say you have money or the fines will bebump ed up higher. If you're going to 'bend the truth'a little don't tell your solicitor you're doing it, andbe sure friends watching in co urt don't.start laughin g!The DTl and police will lie anyway ,mo re likely thannot, get your witnesses to focus on these lies andyour solicitor to cro ss question them closely,espe cially any police witnesses.who are more stupidand inexperienced in this kind of case. Demonstrationsou tside the co urt are good for pu blicity and canintimidate the magistrate if big enoug h, but don 'talways help your case (eg. I! you 're pleading 'dum bagainst you if you lose.Get you r Bust Fund together, bystander' how come all these people are sowith gigsjumbl e,radio appeals,donation s all round etc . concerned about yo u?} If you want pr ess, send outIt's good to campaign about your bust on the air if ·Press Releases at least a wt.ek in advance, so the hacksyour station is still going. Most comme rc ial (read can put it in their diaries , and phone tound withWHEN ON AIR . PRECA UTIONS. (Medium Wave). 'conservative' ) pirates don't do th is,cany ing th eir remind ers the day before.Read the FM chapter 'How To Get Away With bid for re spectabili ty so far as to ignore their own Your fine should be paid by the Bust Fund if atIt'. A Jot of those precautions also app ly. best weap on. Make sure the ad dress you gave when all possib le. If not extra costs should be d ivided upAt a MW site yow chances shoul d be much better, arr ested is 'clean' they could possib ly raid you to among everyone in the station (always pleadyou need one person just t-0 stay near the TX, in case look for furth er eviden ce. If you're a politic al station poverty and ask for time to pay).of kids, passers -b etc. and to ab o · w:etcb out ror suspil'ious brn~ag ii When you vc been busted once you should n' t,w >en ey get the dru1ger s.ignal. On many sites you stolen.th e Branch often do t his. ~roadcasting-end-again.,----··- - + -- ..aan-wer k Ollt -looltotti-points-to-give-pt e yours ory strrug , ge any witnesse s to write though you could still do lookout,backup,l'li1v 1 / warning. However yo u might as well abandon the out the ir statemenis togethe r ,make copies and give moni toring etc., as second offend ers normally get,UTT 1 ·I, - , r 1: (i_r:'11'~ 1/ 3.e_r;~ batteries , and certainly the aerial, if you have to run them to your solicitor. Don't trus~ y~ur solicito r the maximum fine.far . If you have ti-ansport or good escape routes you too far, they someti mes say 'plead guilty Just to save If you win the case , as quite often happens, Tx.-::,-~If yo u've done all the above you should be broa d•casting loud and clear . If your signal is st ill wretche d,chances are your crystal is burn t out , or someth ing isblown. Then go home .If all is well, switch off and await the time yourprogramme is cJue to start. Don't detach a~rial wirewith the TX still turned on.BUSTS ... IF ALL GOES WRONGYou're n ic ked . (See Legal Sect ion ).What you sayto them depel!ds on the circumstan ces. If theyhaven 't got you, den y it point blank, give themyour cover stocy ·and a verifiab le address, and stickto your story no matter what . The prob lem with thi sis ii they have nic ked others and they give diffe rentstories , a different name for you etc. Best discussall this beforehand. If caught on the hop, best sayyou don' t know any of the oth ers. You'recau~ht in the act or with the gear. Give thema verifiable name and address and refuse to discussthe matte r furthe r. No matter what. People havemanaged to get off in the past, even with the gearin their hands , but und er the new laws this isunlikely .Although they can arrest and ch arge you , Wega.lbroadcasung 1s still no rmally treated as a '·summonsoffence". Which means they question you, let you gofican try a clean getaway, but a safer method is to hide themse lves tr oub le, if he/she starts getting cold feet have a good party!the gear well ( not too close to the aerial if its left up) get yo urself a new one (they don't like this at all Jt you win there is also some possibliity, inand beat it. We favour bunkers, holes pre-<lug and but it can be do ne}. Get your solicito r to ask for theory of claiming the gear back , though this islined with waterproofs. under rocks, with he avy lids copies of the prosec uti ons witness state ments in much less likely under the new laws. Ask yourcovered with earth and bushes. Jn theory they cou ld advance of the case and make sure you see them. solicitor about it, and if there's a chance get som efindthese with dogs or tnotal detector s, but we' ve In cou rt dress neatly and bH polite to the bastard one else, with some kind of receipt, to appl y forn eve.r heard of them succeeding or even trying. (You (magistrate ) and the filth. Have a good 'h ard luck' it,.saying they'd bough t it befo re the bust .could always bury bits of metal all over the place).The possibilit ies are un limited, if you 're on the ballth ere's no reason tlu,y should get the gear ... and with out that they have u lousy case against you.(eventua lly) , then summo ns you by let ter to appearin court. This ope ns possibilities of getting awaywith iL - you may be able to bullshi t them with afalse name etc. (tho ugh they can now ho ld you onsusp icion of doing this for three days ). They willnormally 'ask to accompany you to the stat ion ',or if they've raided your flat may interrogate youthere and then. If you refuse to go to t.he stationthey will arre st you (for obstru ction , insulting words ,suspicion of ste aling electric etc. etc . ) and take youthere. where you can be interviewed by po lice andDTI. The ·pretext charge' is of ten dropped later.When interviewed in the station it's better really torefuse to say anyth ing, especially if th ere arc severalof you , coverstories ususlly fall apart unde r longand detail ed questioni ng. However silence usuallymean s they will hold you longer. Lf they get you tothe sta tion they are pretty cenam to photograph·"-i"> ~" l~ nos A1J1t:'I')~) l"c,1/,;~.. ...!Jc.ll ~ :,:::~ I/ ~ . , _ -- • - II \..'VIU' rPal 11tA11"'v.. .Radio SupportGroupTo join Radio Support Group and get updates anddevelopment aid write to :Radio Support Gro up , c/o Drowned RatCommuni cations,Box 010, 27 Sto kes Croft,Bristol, Avon DSl 3PYFree The AirwavesBCM Box 1502 , London WC1N 3XXRadio Crimes is the name of the FTA bulletin.and will carry full technical updates on thesedesigns, and much more. To join FTA and receivethe bulletin send £2 ( for organisations £! 0)to the address above .JOIN NOW 13•Legal Briefin (condensed and added to from:FREE THE AIRW A YES. June 1984The following is a summary of the legal aspects of unlicensedbroadcasting on land in the UK. The Acts of Parliamentare:Wireless Telegraphy Act 1949Wireless Telegraphy Act 1967Telecommunications Act 1984which we'll refer to as 'the 49 Act', 'the 67 Act' and 't he 84Act'. We also include info about your rights under crimi~allaw generally, but NOT details of changes under the Policeand Criminal Evidence Bill. (Not then enacted. Ed).THE OFFENCESThe main offence is under section 1.1 of the 49 Act as follows"No person shall establish or use any station for wirelesstelegraphy or install or use any apparatus for wireless telegraphyexcept under the authority granted by the Secretary ofState, and any person who establishes or uses any station forwireless telegraphy or installs or uses any apparatus for wirelesstelegraphy except under and in accordance with such alicence shall be guilty of an offence under this Act".The terms 'sta tion for wireless telegraphy' and 'appara tus forwireless telegraphy' are interpreted (s19.1) as referring to stationsand apparatus for emmitting or receiving overpaths which are not provided by any material substance constructedor arranged for that purpose, of electromagnetic energyof a frequency not exceeding 3 million mHz, for purposesof conveying messages, sound or visual images, or for the actuationor control of machinery or apparatus , or for purposes ofradar.So 'appara tus for wireless telegraphy' includes relay transmitt ers(links) and remote control devices as.well as broadcast transmitters.(And also TV transmitters but possibly not infra red'links' Ed.) The term 'station' is ambiguous and isn't interpretedmore under the 49 Act. Strictly speaking a station refers toa 'place set apart and equipped for some particular pmpose'and in this case should only refer to the transmitt ing site, andonly include the studio if' progs. are live, or possibly if broadcastingtakes place from the same premises as the studio.For an offence to be made out under this section it has to beshown that you have been involved in setting up or using atransmitt' .ng site, or installing or operating transmitting gear.Any of the site crew could be charged on the angle of being'involved in establishing or using a transmit ting site'. But unlessprogrammes are live it shouldn't include people who makeprogrammes, supply tapes or interviews, advertise or provide amailing address. The DTI did once threa ten to do advertisersfor aiding and abett ing but this hasn't happened. (also not till1986 . Ed)Under the 49 Act its unlikely that you'd be prosecuted unlessthe transmitti ng gear has been tracked down or traced ............ .... (but under the 84 Act you can be. Ed) .. and you had to bemore or Jess caught in the act.Section 7 of the 67 Act (as substitude by s77 of the 84 Actjprovides for the Secretary of State, for the purpose of prevent ingor reducing the risk of interference with wireless telegraphy,to make orders applying restrictions to wireless telegrphyapparatus of any class or description. Any of the folowingactions are subject to restriction under this section:a) manufacture (whether or not for sale)b) selling or offering for sale, letting or offering to let on hireor indicating one's willingness to let on hirec) having in one's custody or controld) importation(its made clear that manufacture includes construction by anyEE THE Amw AVESBox 1502, London WClN,3 X IF ee The Airwaves is stilllg ing strong, as an inf orrnajtin exchange and promotionl·g oup for radical lo cal pir. ates.In t his book we print their~r nsmitter designs, up toW, (any queries write directoth em).'4,DIO CRlMRSis the name ofh~ FT A Bulleti n (with fullJt~hnica l updates), to join andire eivei ts end£2.001r(1r "n imumdonation)£10for anisations to the aboveta dress.method J t • """mbly of oompon,nt part, ),When such ' rders' are in force a, b, or c are offences under~h7 49 Aft, though in the case of c (possession) the wordswithout reas nable excuse' are added.In_ 1984 t~e nly order in force was ford, importa tion , thoughthis appe~re to apply to only CB rigs (with an inbuilt or connectedmf,'cr phone or microphone socket). And the penaltyfor impor at on is only confiscation (under the Customs andExcise Ma a ement Act , 1979).(However by 1986 it seems that a, and b, have been invokedby 'orde~'. ccording to the Feature, 'Pirates and the Law'in TX m a ine, Jan 86, with the same max fine of £2 000no prison se tence. We have no reports of any prosecution;for sale o anufactu re, and as late as Oct 86 a TX rig wasreturned y olice after being taken in a drugs raid with theadvice . .'Y u' better not use tha t'. Ed). '40.THE P49 Act (S ct'onl.1) The main offence of unlicensed broadcasting.Its a 1su mary convicticn (ie magistrates court) and themaximum p nalty is 3 months in prison or a fine of up to£2 ,000 ot b th. In practice present penalties (1986) rangefrom £20p t £1000 for a first offence. It depends where youare (in C~nt l London fines tend to be much higher than elsewhere)an:d n the mood of the magistrate (check they haven'tgot share~ in :,our local IBA franchise!) Fines are likely to begreater fot p rsons seen as ringleaders, and for 2nd or 3rd offences,with he chance of a suspended sentence after moreconvictio*. But we have no reports of anyone going to prisonyst, and spm people have a dozen convictions. Ed 1986)IAlso undt'r t e 49 Act (sl. 1) its an offence to listen to pirateradio.So o r entire audience is breaking the law! We have arecord of o e member of an Our Radio team being done forthis (they c .uldn't get him on anything else). He got a £30fine.